The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Parochial History of Cornwall, Volume 4
(of 4), by Davies Gilbert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Parochial History of Cornwall, Volume 4 (of 4)

Author: Davies Gilbert

Contributor: Mr Hals
Mr Tonkin

Release Date: October 23, 2019 [EBook #60558]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAROCHIAL HISTORY OF CORNWALL, VOL 4 ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Carol Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT-STREET.




THE

PAROCHIAL HISTORY

OF

CORNWALL,

FOUNDED ON THE MANUSCRIPT HISTORIES

OF

MR. HALS AND MR. TONKIN;

WITH ADDITIONS AND VARIOUS APPENDICES,

BY

DAVIES GILBERT,

SOMETIME PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY, F.A.S. F.R.S.E. M.R.I.A. &c.
&c. AND D.C.L. BY DIPLOMA FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.


_IN FOUR VOLUMES._

VOL. IV.




LONDON:

PUBLISHED BY J. B. NICHOLS AND SON;

AND SOLD BY

  J. LIDDELL, BODMIN; J. LAKE, FALMOUTH; O. MATTHEWS, HELSTON; MESSRS.
    BRAY AND ROWE, LAUNCESTON; T. VIGURS, PENZANCE; MRS. HEARD, TRURO;
    W. H. ROBERTS, EXETER; J. B. ROWE, PLYMOUTH; AND ALL OTHER
    BOOKSELLERS IN CORNWALL AND DEVON.

1838.





HISTORY

OF THE

PARISHES OF CORNWALL.




STITHIANS.


HALS.

Stithians is situate in the hundred of Kerrier, and hath upon the
north Gwenap, west Gwendron, east Gluvias and Peran-well, south Mabe.

I take it to be the same place taxed in the Domesday Book 1087, by the
corrupt name of Stachenue.[1] At the time of the first inquisition
into the value of Cornish Benefices this church was not endowed if
extant, nor its daughter church Peranwell; but in Wolsey’s Inquisition
1521, it was rated by the name of Stedians, £14. 0_s._ 8_d._ The
patronage formerly, as I am informed, either in the rector and fellows
of the College of Regular Priests at Glasnith, or the Governor of St.
John’s Hospital at Sithney, now in Boscawen; the incumbent ――――
Hillman, and the parish rated to the four shillings per pound Land
Tax, for one year 1696, £104. 4_s._ 0_d._; the rectory in ――――
Boscawen.

This church is dedicated to St. Thomas à Beckett, and accordingly
their parish festival is kept on St. Thomas’s Day, July 7th, as
was its superior collegiate church of Glasnith, founded by Walter
Branscomb, Bishop of Exeter, A. D. 1256.

The barton and manor of Penalmicke, id est, the head or chief coat of
mail armour, so called for that such armour was made or lodged in this
place in former ages by the possessors or proprietors thereof; which
place gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen from thence
surnamed de Penalmick; from whose heirs it passed to Skewish, tempore
Queen Mary, of whose posterity Collan Skewish, gent. tempore 3d of
James I. sold the same to Sir Nicholas Hals of Fentongollan, knight,
whose son John Hals, esq. sold the same to Pendarves, now in
possession thereof as I am informed.

Tretheage, alias Tredeage, in this parish, is the dwelling of John
Morton, gent. that married ―――― Wilton.

On the south-west part of this parish towards Gwendron, near the
highway, are still to be seen nine stones perpendicularly erected in
the earth, in a direct manner, called the Nine Maids or Sisters,
probably set up there in memory of nine religious sisters or nuns in
that place, before the fifth century (See St. Colomb Major and
Buryan); not women turned into stones as the English name implies, and
as the country people thereabout will tell you. See also Gwendron.

This parish is enriched with streams and lodes of tin in abundance.


TONKIN.

Stithians is in the hundred of Kerrier, and hath to the west Gwendron,
to the north Gwenap, to the east St. Piran Arwothall, and to the south
Constanton and Mabe.

This parish takes its name from its guardian saint St. Stithians
[rather Stithian. But who was he? W.]

It is a vicarage, valued together with St. Piran Arwothall in the
King’s Book [see Piran Arwothall before], and hath the same patron,
impropriator, and incumbent with that. I shall begin with the chief
estate in it,


THE MANOR OF TRETHEAGE,

――the fair town or dwelling. [The fair house. W.] And so it may be
well called, considering the country it lies in, as being for that
pleasantly situated on the river which runs under Ponsannowth or New
Bridge, and emptieth itself under Piran Arwothall church. This was
formerly a manor of large extent, but now strangely curtailed.

Of late years it hath been the seat of the family of Morton; the last
of which who lived here, John Morton, gent. who married ―――― the
daughter of John Wilton of Dunveth, gent. was oddly outed of it
(169..) by Nicholas Pearce; who having gotten a great deal of money in
Magdalen Ball in Gluvias, settled it on his son Nicholas Pearce,
lately dead, leaving by ―――― his wife, the daughter of ―――― Trewren,
esq. of Trewardreva, one son Nicholas Pearce, a minor, who is the
present lord of this manor. Morton’s arms were, Argent, a chevron
between three moorcocks Sable.


THE EDITOR.

The church and tower of this parish are handsome objects built of
granite, which abounds throughout all that district.

Mr. Lysons gives, as usual, on account of the ancient manors. The
manor of Kennal, he says, belonged in the reign of Edward the Second
to Matthew Penfern, afterwards to the Carminows, one of whose
coheiresses brought it to the Arundells of Lanherne; by whom, in the
year 1800, it was sold to three brothers of the name of Bath, who are
the present proprietors. The manor of Roseeth is the property of
Thomas Hocker, esq. the devisee of Thomas Reed, esq. The barton of
Tretheage is the residence of Mrs. Curgenven, widow of the late
proprietor, Captain Curgenven, of the Royal Navy. The barton of
Penalurick belongs to Mr. Hocker, and Stephen Ustick, esq. The bartons
of Treweek and Tresavren belonged to the family of Hawes, but now to
Mr. James Brown.

Tretheage, situated near the turnpike road leading from Truro to
Helston, has a very pleasing appearance in the midst of a country
almost bare of trees. About fifty or sixty years ago this place was
the residence of a gentleman called Tincombe, who had been a
practitioner of medicine, but retired to Tretheage, where either he or
his father had built the present house. He married a Miss Kniverton of
Tredreath in Lelant, but died without children.

Trevales has been for many years the residence of the late Mr. Thomas
Reed, and of his ancestors; who having been long what is termed good
livers in the parish, advanced themselves by successful adventures in
mines, and by conducting a tin smelting house in the parish of Perran
Arworthall. Mr. Thomas Reed never married, and devised the greater
part of his property to Mr. Hocker his near relation.

Mr. Lysons says, the church of Stithians was given by Edward the Black
Prince, to the abbey of Rewley near Oxford, in exchange for the manor
of Nettlebed. It appears from the printed documents relative to that
abbey, that Edmund Earl of Cornwall, in pursuance of his father’s
direction, Richard King of the Romans, founded Rewley Abbey in the
year 1280.

His charter, inter alia, has these words:

Sciant præsentes et futuri quod nos Edmundus, claræ memoriæ domini
Ricardi regis Alemanniæ filius, et Comes Cornubiæ, dedimus,
concessimus, et hac præsenti carta nostra confirmavimus Deo et
Ecclesiæ beatæ Mariæ de Regali-loco juxta Oxon. et Abbati inibi
commoranti, et quindecim Monachis capellanis ordinis Cisterciensis
sibi professis, pro anima Ricardi quondam Regis Alemanniæ patris
nostri divina celebrantibus, et eorum successoribus ibidem
commorantibus, Deo servientibus et imperpetuum servituris,
omnes terras et tenementa quæ habuimus in North Oseneye juxta Oxon ――――
cum Advocatione Ecclesiæ de Sancta Wendrona et aliis pertinentiis suis
in hundredo de Kerier in Cornubia. Preterea dedimus ―――― totum nemus quod
habuimus apud Netlebedde ――――

And in the Valor Ecclesiasticus, taken after the dissolution by Henry
the Eighth, is this entry:

  Com. Cornub.
  Wendrono et Stadyon, Firma Rector’ £22. 0_s._ 0_d._

But nothing appears relative to the exchange of Nettlebed for
Stithians.

The late vicar, the Rev. Edward Nankivell from St. Agnes, had been for
several years Chaplain to the Factory at Smyrna.

  Stithians measures 3987 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as     £. _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815        4110   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                        910  12   0
  Population, { in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
              {   1269   |   1394   |   1688   |   1874.
    giving an increase of 47½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. C. W. Woodley, presented by the Earl of
    Falmouth in 1829.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

With the exception of a small patch on its eastern extremity, this
parish is situated entirely on granite, affording varieties similar to
those of Gwennap, Redruth, Camborne, and Crowan, all of which are
intersected by beds of porphyry, called by the miners elvan courses.
The slate which occurs on the eastern side of this parish is
felspathic, resembling that of the adjoining parish of Gwennap.


     [1] There is no such name in Domesday Books; Mr. Hals must
     have misread Stratone or some similar name.




STOKE CLIMSLAND.


HALS.

Stoke Climsland is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the
north Lezant, west Southill, east Calstock and the Tamar River, south
Killington.

This parish and church take their name from the manor of Stow
Climsland in this parish aforesaid, and by that name it was taxed in
the Domesday Book 1087. It was first given by Orgar Duke of Devon, or
Elphrida his lady, to Tavistock Abbey in Devon, which he had founded.
(Dugdale’s Monasticon Anglicanum, page 360.) Afterwards it became the
possession of the Kings of England or Earls of Cornwall, and was by
King Edward III. incorporated into the Duchy of Cornwall 1336. (See
the charter under Lestwithiel.) And to remove an action at law out of
the Court Leet of this Duchy or Stannary Manor, or any other in Devon,
as I have elsewhere noted under Helleston, the writ must be thus
directed:――

Gardiano Stannarum Devon et Cornubiæ, Capitali Senescallo Ducatus sui
Cornubiæ, aut suo Deputat. ibidem. Et precipue sibi aut suo Deputat.
Senescallo infra manerium de Stow Climsland parcell. Ducatus Cornub.
pred. infra Com. Cornub. &c.

Of Hengiston Downs, King Egbright’s victory, and tin works in this
parish, I have spoken under Killington. And of this manor of
Climsland, and the park of Cari Bollock in this parish are mention
made in the Duke’s Charter aforesaid. Now the modern name
Cary-Bollock, I take to be only a corruption of Carow-Bollogk, female
deer of a stag, probably kept here in the Duke’s park, when brought
out of the forest of Dartmoor.

It appears from the ancient Survey of the Duchy of Cornwall in the
Exchequer, tempore Edward III. (and Blount’s Tenures, from thence also
extracted page 107), that the old tenure of this Duchy Manor of
Climsland or Clemsland, was villanage.

The manor of Rillaton in this parish, was invested with the
jurisdiction of a Court Leet, and is annexed to the Duchy of Stoke
Climsland, with all its privileges, as I am imformed. To remove an
action at law from which, the writ must be thus directed: Senescallo
Decanorum, Præposit. et liberis tenent. Manerii sui de Rillaton,
parcell. Ducatus sui Cornub. in Com. Cornub. salutem.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294,
Ecclesia de Stoke, in decanatu de Est, was rated at cvi_s._ viii_d._
In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, Stoke Climsland Church was valued at
£40, the patronage in the Dukes and Earls of Cornwall that endowed it;
the incumbent      ; and the parish rated to the four shillings per
pound Land Tax, for one year 1696, £424. 14_s._


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Is situate in the hundred of East, and hath to the west Linkinhorne
and Southill, to the north Lezant, to the east the river Tamar, to the
south Kellington and Calstock.

Stoke is the same with Stow, a place; and hath the adjunct of
Climsland from the great duchy manor here.

[The word is Clema’s land, Clemmow being a personal name still in
Cornwall, pronounced there Clemma, and meaning Clement. W.]

This is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book £40; the patronage in the
Duke of Cornwall, the incumbent Mr. John Heron.


THE MANOR OF CLIMSLAND.

This, in the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edw. I. (Carew, fol. 48) is
valued in fifty, by the name of Clemysland, in which I suppose is
comprehended the park of Carybullock belonging thereto. This being
one of the ancient manors belonging to the Duke of Cornwall, and so
settled by Edward the Third on his son Edward the Black Prince in the
eleventh year of his reign, I shall say no more of it here, but come
to the most remarkable places in it; and first to


CARY BULLOCK PARK.

So Mr. Carew calls it (fol. 115), “Carybullock,” saith he “some time a
parke of the Duke’s, but best brooking that name now it hath lost its
qualitie, through exchanging deere for bullocks.” Sir John Dodridge
(History of Wal. and Corn. p. 84, &c.) calls it Kerry-bollock; but
what if I should say the right name was Caer-bollick, and did signify
the intrenched inclosure on the river?――the situation would exactly
answer this derivation; but, since the writing of this, I find
(Salmon’s Survey of England, vol. II. p. 714) that Mr. Baxter, in
Bullœum or Buelt (according to Mr. Camden) in Brecknockshire,
interprets it to be Caer-Bulack or “Principis Domus,” the Prince’s
town or inclosure, which (if true) would suit very well with this.
[This is a judicious application of one of Mr. Baxter’s etymons to the
present place; Bulœum, as Baxter says the name is written in the
superior copies of Ptolemy’s Geography, Baxter thinks with Lhwyd to be
the modern Caer Phylli. Bel, he says, is properly a head, and
figuratively a king. This makes Caer Bulack, “quod ara est Regia.”
“Certe,” he adds, very usefully, “vel ipsi novimus in Montegomerica
nostra Regione Domunculam antiqua Rhesi filii Theodori progenie
nobilem;” ennobled by the birth of Rhys ap Tudor, “vel hodie nominatam
Caer Bulach, tanquam Principis dicatur domus.” In proof of Mr.
Baxter’s seemingly unfounded interpretation of Bel, Bol, or Bul, a
head and a king, we may observe the name of the sun Beal, in the
Beal-tine of Cornwall and the Beil-tine of Ireland for the fires on
May-day in honour of the sun; Beal, Bil (I.) a mouth; Bil (W.) the
mouth of the vessel; Bollog (I.) a shell, a scull, the top of the
head; Fal (I.) a king or great personage; Folar (I.) to command;
Folarthoir (I.) an emperor; Folladh (I.) government; Ffelaig (W.) a
general, a captain, a leader; Belee, plural Belein (C.) a priest or
priests; Belek (A.) a priest; Pol-kil (C.) the hinder part of the head
or the top of the neck; and in Belinus, Cunobelinus, and the
promontory Bolerium of the ancient Britons; and Caer-Bulack, as a
royal house is called equally in Wales, would in the Cornish mode of
pronunciation be Cerry-bullock, as Car-hayes is Carry-hayes at
present. W.]

Which since its being disparked by King Henry VIII. has been set out
at lease to several gentlemen, and is now held by Sir John Coryton, of
Newton, Bart.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons enumerates the manors; the principal of which are the manor
giving its name to the parish, part of the ancient possessions of the
duchy of Cornwall, and the manor of Climsland Prior, extending into
Linkinhorne, which formerly belonged to the priory of Launceston; and
after the general dissolution was given with many other manors forming
the modern duchy in exchange for the honour and castle of Wallingford.

Carrybullock, disparked by King Henry the Eighth, was held under a
lease from the duchy by Mr. Weston Helyar.

Mr. Lysons mentions other manors and bartons of no general interest,
with the exception of Whiteford, on account of its late proprietor.

Mr. John Call was one of those individuals of whom the country
adjacent to the Tamar may be proud.

It is understood that he was born on the Devonshire side of the river,
and various tales are related of his first advancement in life; these
are usually little worthy of attention, and are most frequently
exaggerated from an innate love of the marvellous. Mr. Call having
proceeded to India as an engineer, most eminently distinguished
himself in that field, more ample than any recorded in history for the
successful display of abilities, and active persevering industry; and
where, for the first time since distinct nations have been brought
into contact by the improvements of navigation and of commerce, the
vanquished have become debtors to the more successful party for
protection, for the administration of equal laws and of impartial
justice, and for the introduction among the inhabitants of the spirit
of honour, the glory of modern Europe.

Here Mr. Call having served his country, and justly acquired the
legitimate rewards of fame and of ample fortune, retired to his native
country, purchased Whiteford, which he converted into a handsome seat,
and much other property in the neighbourhood. His active mind could
not, however, remain unemployed; he became a banker, a manufacturer of
plate-glass, and a copper smelter. He served the office of Sheriff for
Cornwall in the year 1771; afterwards represented Callington in
Parliament, and was finally created a Baronet.

It may be interesting to insert some miscellaneous information which
the gentleman communicated to this Editor in Oct. 1798, while he
resided for a few weeks or months at Marazion, and which was
imperfectly noted at the time.

He received the whole of his education as an engineer under Mr.
Benjamin Robins, F.R.S. Engineer-General to the East India Company,
the well-known author of various mathematical tracts, and especially
of a treatise on the principles of gunnery, the force of gunpowder,
and on the resisting power of the air to bodies in swift and in slow
motion. This treatise his pupil Mr. Call transcribed for the press;
and no doubt he assisted in making those admirable experiments and
mathematical deductions from them, which have given a new character
to this important branch of military science, as well in respect to
small arms, and more especially to rifled barrels, as to cannon and
mortars, in reference to which Mr. Call made an additional improvement
so as to discharge shells from long guns by placing the fusee
internally, with its orifice concentric to the surface instead of
projecting, and thereby securing it from injury as the shot rolls in
passing out of the gun.

He successfully defended Fort St. George at Madras; and in 1761
conducted the siege of Pondicherry, which ended in the capture of that
place, the chief seat of the French power in India. Sir John Call also
mentions as a curious circumstance, illustrative of the decisive
effects produced by the well-directed fire of field artillery, that in
a battle where he was present (query, was it Plassey?) a shell from an
howitzer caused the explosion of a carriage containing gunpowder,
which produced some confusion and disorder in the enemy’s line; the
commander instantly ordered a charge, and the victory was decided.

And he related another anecdote on a very different subject. That
having with other amateurs of astronomy made preparations for
observing the transit of Venus by constructing a temporary observatory
on the flat roof of the government house at Madras, they waited with
impatience after a long continuance of fine weather, for the important
3d of June 1761, when a most violent storm on the preceding night
injured or destroyed their instruments so as to render any observation
impossible; and, what added to their mortification and disappointment,
a long continuance of fine weather succeeded this tempest.

Whiteford is now the residence of his son Sir William Pratt Call, who
was Sheriff of Cornwall in 1807, and has a family.

The manor of Climsland Prior paid to the monastery at Launceston, the
free tenants 8_s._ the conventionary tenants £6. 13_s._ 9_d._

The advowson of the living seems to have been appurtenant to the
ancient duchy manor of Stokeclimsland.

  This parish measures 7973 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £. _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6010   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          2084  17   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   1153   |   1237   |   1524   |   1608
    giving an increase of 39½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector the Rev. C. Lethbridge, presented by the Prince of
    Wales in 1805.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The southern part of this parish includes the whole of the granite of
Kit Hill, which is for the most part of the coarse-grained crystalline
variety so common in Cornwall. Proceeding northward, the rest of the
parish is found to belong to the schistose rocks; those next to the
granite are felspathic, and contain beds of porphyry, but those more
remote, which form the greater part, must be referred to the
calcareous series.




STRATTON.


HALS.

Stratton is now situate in the hundred from thence denominated
Stratton, (formerly Major Trigshire Cantred) and hath upon the north
Powghill, east Lancells, south Marhamchurch, west Bude Bay and the
Channel. As for the name, after the Saxon, it is compounded of
Strat-ton, i. e. street or highway town, a lane or public road,
derived perhaps from the Latin strata, a street or Roman highway; and
by this name of Stratton, it is taxed in the Domesday Book 1087. In
the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester aforesaid
1294, Ecclesia de Stratone, in decanatu de Major Trigshire, was rated
£7. 13_s._ 4_d._ vicar’ ibidem 20_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, it
was valued £10. 11_s._ 6½_d._ The patronage formerly in the prior
of Lancells, who endowed it as I am informed; now ――――; the
incumbent ――――; and the rectory in possession of ――――; and the
parish rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax 1696, £290.
18_s._ The town of Stratton is privileged with a weekly market on
Tuesdays, and Fairs annually on the 8th of May, 28th of October, and
30th of November.

Thurlebere, Thurle-ber, bir, in this parish, was another district
taxed in the Domesday Book 1087, from whence was denominated an
ancient family of gentlemen surnamed De Thurlebere, or whurle-ber; i.
e. cast, whirle, twine, the spit, short spear, dart, pike, lance or
broach, for so the terminative particle ber, bere, bir, indifferently
signifies. See Floyd upon Obelus. In this place John de Thurlebere
held by the tenure of knight’s service, twenty pounds per annum in
lands, tempore Edward III. and John de Cobham had likewise in it by
the same tenure the third part of a knight’s fee. (Survey of Cornwall,
page 40 and 52.) One of those Thurleberes married the daughter and
heir of Thomas de Waunford, Lord of Ebbingford, alias Efford in Bude
Bay, and afterwards made it the place of their residence, tempore
Henry V. till at length the daughter and heir of those Thurleberes was
married to Arundell of Trerice, tempore Edward IV. whose posterity are
now in possession thereof.

Near this town of Stratton, in a field called ―――― there happened on
Tuesday the 16th of May 1643, a sore and bloody battle between the
army or soldiers of King Charles I. under conduct of his general Sir
Ralph Hopton, knight, and Major-General Chudleigh, Commander of the
Parliament Forces in those parts; where, after a sharp contest from
five of the clock in the morning till three in the afternoon, the
fight or success continued doubtful: so that Sir Bevill Grenvill,
knight, was unhorsed, and his troop put into disorder by Chudleigh’s
men; and the king’s party had been totally overthrown had not Sir
John Berkeley with great courage and conduct led up the musketeers he
commanded to their seasonable assistance, maintaining the charge with
that stoutness, that the Parliament army, after the loss of about
three hundred soldiers, gave ground, and Chudleigh was taken prisoner,
with seventeen hundred more of his party. The king’s army having
sustained the loss of about two hundred persons, had the plunder of
the field, wherein they found seventeen brass pieces of ordinance,
seventy barrels of powder, three thousand arms, with ammunition,
provision, and biscuit, proportionable.

The country people hereabout will tell you, that the field aforesaid
where this battle was fought, being afterwards tilled to barley,
produced sixty bushels of corn, Winchester measure, in every acre (See
St. Sennan); the fertility whereof is ascribed to the virtue the lands
received from the blood of slain men and horses, and the trampling of
their feet in this battle.

For this victory, Sir Ralph Hopton, knight of the Bath, was by Letters
Patent dated at Oxford, 4th September, 19 Charles I. by him created
Baron Hopton of Stratton; but he dying without issue at Bruges in
Flanders, King Charles the Second, in the 12th year of his reign,
conferred that honorary title of Straton, upon Sir John Berkeley
aforesaid (younger son of Sir Maurice Barkley of Bruton in Somerset)
who also was one of the four managers of martial affairs in Cornwall
for King Charles I. together with the Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton
aforesaid, and Colonel Ashburnham; he also reduced Exeter, and was
made governor thereof, and gave for his arms in a field Ruby a chevron
Ermine, between ten crosses pattee Pearl, six in chief, and four in
base.

The ancestor of this Sir Ralph Hopton, knight, came out of France or
Normandy, a soldier or huntsman under William the Conqueror 1066, by
the name of the Norman Hunter, to whom he gave Hopton in the Hole
in the county of Salop, (from whence afterwards he was denominated De
Hopton,) which he conveyed to him and his heirs, and failing the
remainder, to the crown.

Sir William de Mohun, one of the founders of the Abbey of Newham in
Devon, 30th Henry III. gave to the same the bailiwick of the hundred
of Axminster, and also the manor of Norton, with the hundred and
bailiwick of Major Trigshire, now Stratton in Cornwall. (See Prince’s
Worthies of Devon.) After the dissolution of Newham Abbey, 26 Henry
VIII. it fell to the crown, from whence the present titles of those
bailiwicks are derived.


TONKIN.

Stratton is in the hundred of the same name, and is bounded to the
west by the north or Severn channel and Poughill, to the north by
Kilkhampton, to the east by the river Tamar, to the south by Lancells,
Marhamchurch, and Poundstock.

As for the name, it is no other than the street town, from its
consisting chiefly of one street, and being a great thoroughfare, but
more probably from a Roman Way. [from the Roman stratum or street
certainly, on which it lies. W.]

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. the rectory was valued (Tax. Ben.) at £7.
13_s._ 4_d._ being appropriated to the Priory of Lanceston; and the
vicar at 20_s._

This church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book, at £10. 11_s._
6_d._ ob.; the patronage in the crown.


THE MANOR OF STRATTON.

In Domesday Book Stratone was one of the manors given by William the
Conqueror to his half-brother Robert Earl of Morton, when he made him
Earl of Cornwall.

In the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edward I. (Carew, fol. 48), it
is valued in 21. In 3 of Henry IV. (Id. fol. 40 b.) Ranulph de Albo
Monasterio (Whitchurch) [a family in this parish, formerly called
Blancminster] held here one knight’s fee.


THE EDITOR.

Stratton is a neat although a small town. Before the great roads were
made through the middle of the county along the central ridge and
above the formation of deep valleys, a northern entrance into Cornwall
passed through this town.

Mr. Lysons says, that the manors of Stratton and Binomy belonged at an
early period to an ancient family called in various records De Albo
Monasterio, or Blanchminster and Whitminster. The property passed by
an heiress to the family of Hiwis; and Emmeline the heiress of Hiwis,
married first, Sir Robert Tresilian, Chief Justice of the King’s
Bench, who lost his life through popular violence in the year 1388;
and secondly, Sir John Coleshill.

Sir John Coleshill, son of the above, was killed at the battle of
Agincourt in 1415, leaving an infant son; after whose death in 1483
the large estates of this family passed by a female heir to a younger
branch of the Arundells, and were afterwards divided among its
numerous representatives.

The manors of Binomy and Stratton having been purchased by the
Grenvilles, have descended to Lord Carteret.

The manor of Efford or Ebbingford, belonged at an early period to the
Waumfords or Waunfords, from whom it passed by a coheiress to the
Durants, and from them by an heiress to the Arundells of Trerice, from
whom it is derived to Sir Thomas Dyke Acland of Killerton.

The church and tower are fine specimens of the style of architecture
prevalent throughout the West of England. There are also several
monuments; and Mr. Lysons quotes from the register, the baptism
and death of Elizabeth Cornish, who lived between these two dates, 113
years 4 months and 13 days. She was baptized in Oct. 1578, and was
buried March the 10th, 1691.

The great tithes and the manor denominated Sanctuary, or Sentery, as
was usual with such professions, belonged to the Priory of Launceston.
After the dissolution of monasteries, this manor carrying with it the
advowson of the vicarage, was annexed to the Duchy of Cornwall, with
various other lands, in exchange for the honour and castle of
Wallingford.

The great tithes were granted to the family of Wadder, but they have
since been sold in parcels.

The place of most importance in this parish after the town, is Bude.
This place has always given some shelter for boats, and afforded sand
for manure. It has within about twenty years received most essential
improvement. A pier or jetty has been built out into the sea, and a
canal with inclined planes has been made for the conveyance of coal
and merchandise into the country, and for bringing down slate and the
produce of land; but above all, for supplying sand as a manure. The
sand at this place consists entirely of powdered shells, as it does
along the whole north coast of Cornwall, and it is found to be so
efficacious for imparting fertility to clay lands, that it is
frequently conveyed in wheel carriages to so great a distance from the
coast, as to require the draft cattle remaining out a night.

The boats used on this coast are formed like boxes, having within each
side a closed trough containing two wheels, which project a very
little beyond the lower surface. These wheels are consequently no
impediment to the boats floating on the water, but they enable them to
ascend or to descend the inclined planes with the facility of other
carriages. See a Treatise on the Improvement of Canal Navigation, by
R. Fulton, 1 vol. 4to, London, 1796, p. 32, where this plan is
suggested perhaps for the first time.

Bude is also become a place of resort for sea bathing; and several
houses for the accommodation of strangers have been built by Sir
Thomas Acland, so that it has acquired the well-known appellation of a
watering place.

The Editor having omitted through inadvertence to notice in the
adjoining parish of Launcels a gentleman one of the most respectable
in the north-eastern part of Cornwall, hopes that he may be excused
for inserting his name here.

Launcells House, a modern building on the spot where formerly stood
the residence of the Chamonds, is the seat of George Boughton Kingdon,
esq. respected by every one who has the honour of his acquaintance,
for scientific and literary acquirements, and esteemed as a benefactor
to his neighbourhood in the characters of a magistrate and of a worthy
country gentleman.

An instance of longevity has been given in the parish of Stratton, and
an occurrence has been stated to the Editor, which proves that
Launcells participates in the general healthiness of that district.

It seems the identical six men who rang the bells in Launcells tower
on the Coronation of King George the Third, rang them also on the day
of his jubilee, having continued the parish ringers during all that
time.

Their names are recorded in the parish, and may therefore be inserted
here.

John Lyle, Henry Cadd, Richard Venning, John Ham, John Allin, Richard
Hayman.

And of these, John Lyle rang at the accession of King George the
Fourth, and of his present Majesty King William the Fourth, being then
in his ninety-sixth year: but all are now gathered to their fathers.

And here, as appertaining more to the general character of the country
than to any particular parish, in reference to the terrific cliffs
which surround this coast, it may be proper to state a fact
communicated by Mr. Kingdon; that, from actual measurement taken by
himself, Hennacleve cliff on Westcot Down, in the parish of
Moorwinstow, is 430 feet above the level of the beach.

  Stratton measures 2300 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £. _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           3563   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           710  19   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    960   |   1094   |  1580    |  1613
    giving an increase of 68 per cent in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Jacob Hawker, presented by the King as
  Prince of Wales in 1833.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish, like the adjoining one of Kilkhampton, is composed of
compact and of schistose varieties of dunstone, occasionally
interspersed with beds of calcareous schist and limestone.




TALLAND.


HALS.

Talland is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the north
Pelynt, east the haven or harbour of Looe, south the British Channel,
west Lansallas.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this district was taxed under the
Jurisdiction and in the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester, into the value of Cornish Benefices, Ecclesia de Talland
1294, was rated at £8. vicar ejusdem 40_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
1521, it was not valued or named. The patronage is in ――――; the
incumbent ――――; and the rectory in possession of ――――; and the
parish rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax 1696, for one
year, £156. 15_s._ But if the word Talland be compounded only of
Ta-land, it signifies the good acceptable land.

West Looe, alias Porth-Vyan, Porth-Byan, alias Porth-Bichan or
Porth-Bigan, or Pigan, all synonymous words in British, only varied by
the dialect, which signifies the little gate, cove, creek, or
entrance, according to the natural circumstances of the place, where
daily the sea makes its flux and reflux some miles up into the land or
country, through a narrow passage betwixt the parishes of St. Martin’s
and Talland aforesaid, over which is a curious and strong stone bridge
of about twelve arches, which as an artificial ligament fastens those
parishes and the towns of East and West Looe together; which latter,
by the name of Porth Byhan, was taxed as the voke lands of a
privileged borough or manor in the Domesday Book as aforesaid, 1087,
and still known by the name of Porth Byan or West Looe; and by this
name all its privileges were confirmed, and the town incorporated 16th
of Queen Elizabeth, by the name of the mayor and burgesses thereof,
consisting of a mayor and twelve burgesses.

The members of Parliament are elected by the majority of freemen; and
the precept from the Sheriff, or the writ for electing those members,
as also for removal of an action at law depending in this court to a
superior, must be thus directed:

Majori et Liberis Burgensibus Burgi sui de Porth Byan, alias West
Looe, in comitatu Cornubiæ, salutem.

And as a further testimony of its present grandeur, though I take it
much inferior in riches and building to the late erected town of East
Looe, it hath ever, and still stands as a noun substantive in the
Exchequer, and was rated to the four shillings per pound Land Tax for
one year, by the name of the borough of West Looe, £15. 13_s._ 1696.
Whereas, the borough of Michell falls under the tax of Newlan and St.
Enedor parishes; Bosinney or Trevena under Dundagell; and Camelford
under Lantegles, in the Exchequer, without name or value.

This town is also privileged with a fair yearly, on 25th April, and
markets weekly.

[Illustration: _Seal of “Portuan otherwys called West Lo.”_]

The arms of this borough are, a soldier or man of war Proper, with a
bow in one hand, and an arrow in the other. For the etymology of Looe,
see East Looe.

This manor of borough of Porthbyan, as I am informed, was heretofore
villanage tenure, and pertained to the Bodrigans.

In this town of West Looe, was born Charles Wager, as I am informed,
son of ―――― Wager; who, being placed an apprentice at sea, grew so
expert in navigation and the mathematics, that he became a great
master in that art; and being after in the sea fight between Queen
Anne and the French and Spaniards, he behaved himself so well in his
valour and conduct, though to the loss of one of his arms, that by
Queen Anne or King George he was afterwards knighted, and preferred,
not only to the command of a third-rate frigate, but made Admiral of
the Red Squadron of Men of War, for him and his son King George the
Second, in the Baltic Sea and British Channel 1729.

In this parish stands the barton and manor of Killygarth. This
lordship, tempore Edward III. was the lands of the Sergeaulxes, and
particularly of Richard de Sergeaulx, who is mentioned in Mr. Carew’s
Survey of Cornwall, page 52, 25 Edward III. then to have held in
Cornwall, by the tenure of knight service, £20 per annum in lands and
tenements. His son Sir Richard Sergeaulx, knight, was Sheriff of
Cornwall, 12 Richard II. whose son Richard Sergeaulx held in
Killygarth, Lanreth, and Lansulhas, three little knight’s fees of land
of Morton, as also two fees and a half in Colquite, (idem librum, p.
42,) 3 Henry IV. (five knight’s fees was four thousand acres of land);
who dying without issue male, his three daughters or sisters became
his heirs, and were married to Seyntaubyn and Beare of Cornwall, and
Marney of Essex, as I am informed; after whose decease, Beare became
seised of this lordship, was married and had issue Thomas Beare, esq.
Sheriff of Cornwall, 4th of Edward IV.; and William Beare, Sheriff of
Cornwall, 6th of Edward IV. who gave the bear for his arms, the
colours I know not.

This William Beare had issue only one daughter, married to Peter
Bevill, a younger brother of John Bevill of Gwarnack, esq. who had
issue by her, John Bevill, esq. that married Mileton of Pengersick;
who by her had issue Sir William Bevill, knight, Sheriff of Cornwall,
31st of Elizabeth 1591, that married ――――, but had no legitimate
issue: so that his brother Philip’s daughter Elizabeth became his
heir, and was married to Sir Bernard Grenvill of Stowe, knight, father
of Sir Bevill Grenvill, knight, that sold this lordship of Killygarth
to Killygrew, from whom it passed to Hallet, and from him to Kendall
of Middlesex, now in possession thereof.

The arms of Bevill are Ermine, a bull passant Sable.

Hen-darsike in this parish is a contraction of Hen-dowers-ike, i. e.
old, ancient cove, creek, lake, or bosom of waters, lands probably
under such circumstances. It is the dwelling of John Morth, esq. that
married ―――― Buller of Morvall; his father William Morth was Sheriff
of Cornwall 2 William III.

This family in genteel degree hath flourished in this place for many
generations, though I am not informed as to the particulars.

In this parish at Trenake is the dwelling of Thomas Achym, gent. which
family hath flourished in those parts for many generations in genteel
degree, and give for their Arms, in a field Argent a maunch mantail
Sable, within a bordure of the First charged with cinquefoiles of the
Second. If the name of Achym be a monosyllable, it signifies in
British a descendant, issue, offspring, or progeny.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Talland is in the hundred of West, and is bounded to the west by
Launcells, to the north by Pelynt, to the east by Looe river, and to
the south by the British Channel.

This is a vicarage, not valued in the King’s Book; but in anno 1291,
20 Edward I. it was valued, the rectory (Tax. Benef.) at £8, it having
been appropriated to Launceston Priory; and the vicarage at 40_s._ The
patronage is in Archdeacon Kendall, and the incumbent Mr. Doidge.

Mr. Thomas Kendall had a younger brother, Colonel James Kendall, who
was Governor of Barbadoes in ――――, one of the lords of the Admiralty
under Queen Anne, and a member of Parliament in several Parliaments:
he died suddenly, unmarried, July the 10th, 1708, at his house in
London, very rich, and left a natural son by Mrs. Colliton, who now
goes by the name of Kendall.

Under Killygarth is Porth-Para, vulgo Polpera, id est, the sandy port.
“A little to the eastwards,” saith Carew, (fol. 131 b.) “from
Killygarth, the poor harbour and village of Polpera coucheth between
two steep hills:” [from which circumstance, as I know of no word
similar to para in the Cornish, and signifying sand in English, I
might more aptly take the name to be (as Carew writes, and as usage
sounds it) pol-pera, pol-poran, the close or strait pool. But the fact
is, that the name is purely English, with a Cornish pronunciation. “By
est, the haven of Fowey upon a iiii miles of,” says Leland, Itin. vii.
121), “ys a smawle creke cawled Paul _Pier_, and a symple and poore
village upon the est side of the same, of fisharmen, and the bootes
ther fishing by [be] saved by a _Peere_ or key. In the est side of
this Paul Pirre,” &c. And since the cove is still written as Leland
first writes it, “Paul Pier” (See Borlase’s map) so is it obviously
allusive to the “Pier or Key,” which he mentions at it. W.] where
plenty of fish is vented to the fish-drivers, whom we call “jowters”
[men who jolt about with horses and panniers to sell fish]. And
between this and the church is Porth Talland.

The manor by the name of Tallan, in the extent of Cornish acres, 12
Edward I. is valued in six. (Carew, fol. 49.) [Here let me just note
what Mr. Tonkin has omitted, the etymology of the name of the parish,
and of the manor. Written originally Tallan, and gaining only the
final _T._ by vicious pronunciation, the manor and the parish derive
their name apparently from the church; and this takes its appellation
from its site, I apprehend, being seated upon the high bold shore of
the channel, and so being called Tal-Lan, the high church or the
church upon a high position; just as Tal-ar (C.) signifies a high land
or headland, and as a high rock in St. Allen is called Tal-Carne. W.]
Of the ancient lords of which manor I shall give a full account on the
other side [see towards the end]; and only take notice here, that
within it, and

Next is the church. Near this the family of Murth hath long dwelt. “In
the same parish where Killingworth is seated,” saith Carew, (fol.
131), “Master Murth inheriteth a house and demaynes: hee maried
Treffry: his father Tregose. One of their ancestors, within the memory
of a next neighbour to the house called Prake (burdened with a hundred
and ten yeeres of age), entertained a British [a Bréton] miller; as
that people, for such idle occupations, prove more handie than our
owne. But this fellow’s service befell commodious in the worst sense.
For when, not long after his acceptance, warres grew between us and
France, he stealeth over into his country, returneth privily backe
againe with a French crew, surpriseth suddenly his master and his
guests at a Christmas supper, carrieth them speedily unto Lantreghey,”
[or the church town in Bretagne] “and forceth the gentleman to redeeme
his inlargement with a sale of a great part of his revenues.”

The present owner is Jeffry Murth, esq. who is a Justice of the Peace,
and a very honest good-natured gentleman: he is married to the
daughter of John Oxenham, of Oxenham in Devon, esq. His father, John
Murth, esq. married Elizabeth, the daughter of John Buller, of Morval,
esq. Arms of Murth, Sable, a chevron between three falcon’s legs
erased, with bells, Or.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Bond has given so good and ample an account of this parish in his
Topographical and Historical Sketches of East and West Looe, 1 vol.
8vo. printed by Nichols, 25, Parliament Street, Westminster, 1823,
that the whole which is addative to Hals and Tonkin, is here inserted.

West Looe is situated in the parish of Talland, within which parish is
a hamlet called Lemain, and part of West Looe lies in this hamlet. On
the barton of Portlooe in the parish of Talland, just opposite Looe
Island, was a cell of Benedictine Monks, called Lammana, subject to
the Abbey of Glastonbury, to which the site appears to have been given
by the ancestors of Hastulus de Solenny; there are some remains of the
chapel still in existence.

I measured this chapel on the 13th of April 1815, and found it, within
the walls, about forty-seven feet long by twenty-four wide. About
three or four hundred yards to the eastward of the chapel are the
remains of some antient building, perhaps that in which the monks
dwelt. The remains of the eastern end wall thereof, at present eight
or ten feet high, have two very narrow windows or openings, still in
being. The situation of this chapel and house is very pleasant; they
lie in a sort of natural amphitheatre, sheltered from the north winds
by high land.

In Hearne’s Appendix to Adam de Domerham, is a grant of Hastulus de
Solenny, confirming the Island of St. Michael de Lammana (most
probably that of St. George opposite Looe) to the Monks of
Glastonbury; a grant of Roger Fitzwilliam quitting claim to the lands
of Lammana, which he held for life under the Church of Glastonbury
(reserving the house which Mabil his sister occupied), and one of
Richard Earl of Cornwall, granting the Monks a licence to farm out the
church, and the Island of Lammana. It appears that Abbat Michael,
about the middle of the thirteenth century, leased it to the
Sacristary of the Convent. The Free Chapel of La Mayne in Cornwall,
was granted to Edward Bostock, 5th Jac.――_Lysons’s Mag. Brit._

       *     *     *     *     *

Two of the grants noticed by Mr. Lysons, are printed in the New
Edition of Dugdale’s Monasticon.

     Carta Hastuli filii Johannis de Soleneio.

     Universis Christi fidelibus, ad quos præsens scriptum pervenerit,
     Hastulus filius Johannis de Solenneio, salutem in Domino.
     Universitati vestræ notificetur, quod Ego Hastulus filius
     Johannis de Solenneio concessi, et præsenti carta confirmavi, Deo
     et ecclesiæ beatæ Virginis Mariæ Glaston. et ejusdem loci
     conventui, totam Insulam Sancti Michaelis de Lammana, cum omnibus
     pertinentiis suis, et terris, et decimis, quam ab antiquo, dono
     prædecessorum meorum, tenent; ut in omnibus, tam libere, et
     quiete, et honorifice, ab omni servitio sæculari et exactione
     servili, ipsam possideant, integre, plenarie, et pacifice, in
     planis et pascuis, et in omnibus consuetudinibus liberis, sicut
     Ego melius et liberius terram meam in dominiis meis possideo, et
     ut omnia pecora sua cum meis ubique pascantur. Concedo etiam eis
     plenarie decimas dominii mei omnes de Portlo, et ut jura,
     libertates et consuetudines, sicut ego in mea curia, ita ipsi in
     sua curia habeant. Prohibeo siquidem, ne aliquis ex ballivis vel
     servientibus meis, illis quacumque occasione aliquam molestiam
     inferant; vel sæculare servitium ab eisdem exigere præsumant,
     unde fratres mei, Monachi Glastonienses, in prefato loco Lammana
     Deo servientes, ab eisdem famulatu, ullatenus præpediantur. Si
     quis autem huic concessioni meæ fidem et effectum adhibuerit, a
     pio Judice mercedem condignam inveniat. Qui vero eam in irritum
     ducere præsumpsit, deleat eum Deus de libro vitæ, et cum Juda
     proditore sine fine pœnas exolvat. Ne igitur facti mei tenor
     vacillet in dubio, præsentis scripti paginam sigilli mei
     appositione roboravi. His testibus,

     Helya, tunc ejusdem Priore, et ejus socio Monacho
     Johanne――Henrico filio Milonis――Willelmo
     Milite――Grimbaldo――Roberto Clerico――Jordano Decano――Angero de
     Surtecote――Jocelino Milite fratre ejus――Gervasio Capelleno de
     Sancto――Marco――Rogero Ruffo――Rogero Cileintenat――Willelmo filio
     Roberti――et multis aliis.


     Carta Ricardi Comitis Cornubiæ.

     Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos præsens scriptum pervenerit,
     nobilis vir Ricardus Comes Cornubiæ salutem in Domino. Noveritis
     nos, pro salute nostra, et hæredum et successorum nostrorum,
     remisisse et quieta clamasse in perpetuum pro nobis, heredibus et
     successoribus nostris, viris religiosis, Abbati et conventui
     Glaston. ac Ecclesiæ ejusdem loci, Hospitia cum arreragiis,
     sectas comitatum, schire hundredorum, et curias de factum, et
     omnes alias sectas et consuetudines quæ ad nos et hæredes et
     successores nostros alicujus jure pertinebant seu pertinere
     poterant, de terris et possessionibus suis de Lammena, cum
     pertinentiis, videlicet――pro x solidis sterlingorum annuatim
     solvendis senescallo nostro vel ballivo Cornubiæ apud castrum de
     Lanstavetone ad festum sancti Michaelis. Concessimus etiam, in
     puram et perpetuam elemosinam, dictis Abbati et conventui
     ecclesiæ Glaston, pro nobis et hæredibus et successoribus nostris
     imperpetuum, plenam licentiam et liberam potestatem ponendi
     Ecclesiam et insulam de Lammana, præfatas ecclesias, terras et
     possessiones ejusdem loci cum pertinentiis, ad firmam alienandi.
     Insuper eas, si voluerint, vel aliter de eisdem, pro ipsorum bene
     placitodis ponendi, sine aliqua contradictione, exactione vel
     impedimento nostri vel hæredum aut successorum nostrorum.

     Et ut hæc nostra remissio, quieta clamantia, et concessio rata
     sit et in posterum perseveret, huic scripto sigillum apposuimus.
     His testibus, Dominis Ricardo de Latur, Willelmo Talebot, Petro
     Gandi, Olivero de Aspervile, Petro de la Mare, militibus, Johanne
     de Latur, Ricardo Basset, et aliis.


MIDMAIN ROCK.――PORTNADLER BAY.

Between the main land and Looe Island stands a rock, higher than the
surrounding ones, which is called Midmain or Magmain. Small vessels
frequently pass between the island and the main land, when the tide is
in. An imaginary line drawn from Looe Island westward, to a high rock
called horestone or orestone, about a mile distant, would form the
outer boundary of a piece of water called Portnadler Bay; from whence
the name is derived I know not.


CORPORATION.

Queen Elizabeth incorporated West Looe 14th February 1574, in the
sixteenth year of her reign, by the name of Mayor and Burgesses of the
Borough of Portbyhan, otherwise West Looe, in the county of Cornwall.
Twelve chief burgesses were appointed by this charter. The mayor is
elected from the Chief Burgesses, by their votes and the votes of the
Free Burgesses, on Michaelmas-day annually, between nine and twelve of
the clock in the forenoon, and then sworn into office. The mayor is
also a Justice of the Peace, as is likewise the steward. The mayor has
no power to appoint a deputy. The steward, however, has such an
authority; but his deputy is not a Justice of the Peace.


WEST LOOE DOWN.――GIANT’S HEDGE OR MOUND.

Just above the houses (the intermediate space filled up with gardens
and orchards) is a common or down, called West Looe Down, of near a
hundred acres, on which are the remains of a mound of earth that runs
many miles across the country, and is noticed by Borlase, who, from
its extent and other circumstances, supposed it to be a Roman work.
His account of it as follows: “That the Romans had ways in the eastern
parts of the county about Loo and Lostwithiel, the following antient
work, shewn me by the Rev. Mr. Howell, Rector of Lanreath (June 25 and
26, 1756), will abundantly confirm. It is called the Giant’s Hedge, a
large mound, which reaches from the valley in which the Boroughs of
East and West Looe are situated, to Leryn, on the river Fowey. It is
first visible on West Looe Down, about two hundred paces above the
Mills; whence it runs to Kilminarth Woods; from and through them to
Trelawn Wood, about three hundred paces above Trelawn Mill; then
through Little Larnick to the barton of Hall, in which there are two
circular encampments, about four hundred paces to the north of it;
thence quite through the said barton, making the northern boundary of
fields to the glebe of Pelynt Vicarage, called Furze Park; then cross
the barton of Tregarrick; and thence, through the north grounds of
Tresassen and Polventon, to the glebe lands of the rectory of
Lanreath, where I measured it seven feet high and twenty feet wide at
a medium; thence it stretches through the tenement of Wyllacombe to
Trebant Water; whence it proceeds, through the barton of Longunnet and
some small tenements, to Leryn; from which there is a fair dry down,
called St. Winnow Down, leading north along to Lostwithiel. This
risbank, or mound, ranges up hill and down hill indifferently; has
no visible ditch continued on any brow of a hill, as intrenchments
always have; there is no hollow, or foss, on one side more than the
other; it is about seven miles long, and tends straight from Looe to
Leryn Creek, in the direct line from Looe to Lostwithiel. By all these
properties, its height and breadth, in wanting the fosses of
fortification, its straightness and length, the grandeur of the
design, and the labour of execution, I judge that it can be nothing
less than a Roman work. In this supposition I am the more confirmed,
first, because several Roman coins have been found on the banks of
Fowey river (as see “Antiquities of Cornwall,” p. 282), and, as I have
been informed, also in the run of this notable work; secondly, by its
tendency to the first ford over the navigable river of Fowey; for it
must be observed that the Romans, thoroughly sensible of the delays
and hazards of crossing friths and arms of the sea, and the danger of
bridges getting into the possession of the natives, were equally
averse both to bridges and passing large rivers; they had therefore in
constant view the nearest and most commodious fords of rivers, and
directed their roads accordingly. Now near Leryn Creek, where the work
ends, there is a ford, and no where below is the river Fowey fordable;
which plainly accounts for their conveying this road so high up the
country, that it might at once convey their troops towards their
station at Lostwithiel, and afford them a safe passage over the river
Fowey into the western parts, through Grampont and Truro.”

Borlase also, in his Natural History, says, “There are the remains of
a causey between Liskeard and Looe, near Polgover, the seat of Mr.
Mayow, which, as well as the cross road from Dulo to Hessenford,
vulgar tradition makes to be Roman.” This causey I have never been
able to find out.

The above-mentioned mound is first visible directly above Looe bridge;
so that, if a line was drawn west, as the bridge tends, it would come
to it at the head of a field called Bridgend meadow, where a small
orchard is planted. There is a very visible ditch all along West Looe
Down to the north of the rampart. On the barton of Hall, however, the
ditch is to the south of the rampart. This rampart on the barton of
Hall is at least fifteen feet high and about twenty feet thick at the
base. About four hundred paces north of it, as Borlase says, there are
two apparently (though not perfectly, as I was informed by Captain
Dawson, who assisted in taking the Trigonometrical Survey, under
Colonel Mudge) circular encampments, situated in a field called Berry
Park. Berry Park contains about eighteen acres, and may be termed a
tongue of land. It has a valley on each side, and also at the bottom.
Across the isthmus, if I may so term it, of this tongue of land, runs
the mound, protecting that part of the field which the valleys do not
extend to. The circles (or rings, as they are now called by the
tenant) consist of one entire circle of about 122 paces diameter,
surrounded with a rampart, ditch, and breast-work; the height of which
rampart, from the bottom of the ditch, is, I imagine, upwards of
fifteen feet, and must originally have been much higher. This circle
has but one gateway into it, which is guarded by mounds without
ditches, running upwards of fifty feet into the circle. The part of
this circle where the gateway is, is surrounded by about three fourths
of another circle, whose sweep, had it been continued, would have
intersected the inner circle; but the southern part of this outermost
circle, when it comes within twenty or thirty feet of the inner, falls
into the segment of another circle, which runs parallel to the inner
circle, leaving a platform of about fifty feet breadth between the two
ditches, and surrounding about a third part of the inner circle. From
the gateway of the inner to the opposite point of the outward circle,
is about 144 paces, which may be about three fourths of the diameter.
The outer circle has a similar rampart, ditch, and breast-work with
the inner circle, and one gateway, which is not quite opposite that
of the former. These circles command very fine prospects both of land
and sea. Rame Head and the entrance into Plymouth are visible from
Berry Park. You can see these circles from Bindown Hill with the naked
eye; and from the elevation of that hill you look down on them so as
to see their areas.

In a field a short distance south-west of Pelynt church-town, and
about half a mile in a direct line from the said circles, are many
barrows. The field in which they are, is I believe, called the The
Five Barrows. At the bottom of this field is a highway, leading from
Pelynt Church-town to the Fowey road. In this highway, just at the
bottom of the said field, a few years since, a grave was discovered by
some men mending the highway. It was formed by four stones on their
edges, and a covering stone. In this kestvaen was an urn, with burnt
ashes in it; and round the urn were piled, in a regular manner, the
unburnt remains of human bones. I went to Pelynt purposely to see this
curiosity, but found the grave had been filled up, and its contents
buried. The urn was described to me by a man who saw it as having
ornaments of flowers and leaves on its outside, and that it fell into
sheards when touched. I could not learn that any coin or other thing
was found in the urn or grave; indeed, I fancy there was a lack of
curiosity in all concerned.

Part of the mound on West Looe Down has been from time to time dug
down, to obtain earth for building and plastering. I have several
times desired the labourers, in case of their finding any coin or
other thing curious, to preserve it; but have never heard of any thing
being found of late years. A celt (commonly called in this
neighbourhood a thunderbolt[2]) was some years ago found on this Down;
and it was given by the late Mr. Bawden, of Looe, to Mr. James, of
St. Kevern. I have a celt, made of a hard black stone, which was found
in pulling down an old house at East Looe a few years since; it is
between six and seven inches long, and very perfect. I lately saw some
like it in shape and stone, but not so large, in the British Museum.

I also remember seeing a celt that was found, about thirty years ago,
at Kilminarth, near the ruin of the said mound: about which time a
gold chain and several instruments of brass were found in a decayed
hedge, or side of a highway, near Little Larnic, by an apprentice
girl. Her mistress described them to me as being somewhat like
hatchets, and said “she believed they were things which the warriors
used in antient times.” I applied to the mistress, in hopes of getting
a sight of them; but her apprentice had sold them to a buyer of old
brass. The hedge formed one side of the high road, not far from the
said mound. The apprentice told me that the gold chain was about a
foot and a half in length――that when she found it, not thinking it was
gold, she tied it to the end of a stick, and made a sort of whip of it
to drive home the cows. She some time after discovered that it was
gold, and kept it by her for several years, when she gave it to her
brother, who sold it to a Mr. Patrick, a jeweller at Dock, for three
pounds. The brother told me that Mr. Patrick said it was Corsican
gold; and he (the brother) also told me that he well remembered the
brass instruments, and that some of them were like the tops of
spontoons.


POLVELLAN.

On West Looe Down the late John Lemon, esq. (M.P. for Truro, and who
died April 5, 1814), about the year 1787 erected a small but extremely
neat house in the cottage style, and inclosed some ground round it by
virtue of a grant from the Corporation. He gave it the name of
Polvellan, and laid it out with great taste. Pol, in Cornish, signifies
a Pool, and Vellan a Mill; and below the house are a mill and pool,
inclosed by a stone wall of about half a mile sweep, in a circular
direction. I cannot describe the contrivance and use of this pool
better than in the words of Mr. Carew, in his “Survey of
Cornwall.”――“Amongst other commodities afforded by the sea, the
inhabitants make use of divers his creekes for grist mills, by
thwarting a banke from side to side, in which a flood-gate is placed,
with two leaves; these the flowing tide openeth, and, after full sea,
the weight of the ebb closeth fast, which no other force can doe; and
so the imprisoned water payeth the ransome of driving an under shoote
wheel for his enlargement.” I apprehend the mill and pool-wall were
built by one of the Arundells of Tremodart, in Duloe parish. The wall
is about six or eight feet high, and almost broad enough for a coach
to pass over it, and must have cost a great deal of money. It appears
by a deed which I have seen, that the Mayor and Burgesses of West
Looe, on the 30th of May, in the twelfth year of the reign of James
the First (1614), granted all that parcel, quantity of ground, oze, or
water, now surrounded by the said mill-pool-wall, to Thomas Arundell,
of Tremodart, in the parish of Duloe, esq. for 500 years, from thence
next ensuing; that afterwards the said Thomas Arundell built a
mill-house, and four grist-mills, and other houses, and also the
mill-pool-wall. On November 3, 1648, the said Thomas Arundell made his
will; and I believe the mills and mill-pool-wall were built by him
before he made his will. Afterwards this term in these premises were
assigned over by the Arundells (father and son) and one Drew (perhaps
a mortgagee) to Sir Jonathan Trelawny, for the remainder of the said
term. I am apprehensive, however, that there was a mill at this place
previous to the aforesaid grant.


INCLOSURE OF THE DOWN DESIRABLE.

It is much to be regretted that West Looe Down is not wholly inclosed;
the soil is very good, as is apparent from the fine state of the
grounds of Polvellan. The Looes being bounded by the sea on one side,
and by rivers and woods on the other, arable land is much wanted. The
objection raised against this inclosure is, that the poor of West Looe
would be deprived of gathering furze and fern for firing. But does not
the labour wasted and cloaths worn out in gathering this fuel more
than counteract the gain? If an inclosure were to be made, in a year
or two the hedges would produce greater quantity and more substantial
fuel than can now be obtained. The Down belongs to the Corporation;
but various tenants of houses and fields claim a right of putting what
is called Breaths (cattle), some more, some less, to depasture on it.
To such as are entitled to put breaths on this, common allotments
should be made in proportion to the number of breaths they are
entitled to; and an allotment to the poor might be made in lieu of
their claim (if it is a legal one) to take furze and ferns for firing.
The many advantages which would arise to the poor in particular from
an inclosure, should be considered. Exclusive of the numerous
productions which would follow, labour would be demanded, hedges must
be made, manure procured, land ploughed, corn tilled, cut, &c. &c. &c.
Milk, potatoes, &c. &c. would be obtained at a much more moderate
price than at present; and, no doubt, the poor rate would soon find
the beneficial effect of an inclosure. In short, the advantages
arising herefrom would be very great; and I sincerely hope the
prejudices of the interested will soon be done away, and that the
commoners will get an Inclosure Act passed. Formerly the Corporation
used to let out certain parts of this Down for tillage. There are
several memorandums of such lets in the Town Books. In 1621 that part
of West Looe Down which lieth on the west part of the Homer Well, was
let to rent, for two crops, at 6_s._ 8_d._ per acre.




TRADE.

Formerly a pretty considerable trade was carried on at Looe, and many
ships belonging to this port used to go from thence to France, Spain,
and up the Straits, &c.

Even so late as the beginning of the last century there were several
ships kept here, principally employed in foreign voyages; but, for
seventy or eighty years last past, few, if any, have been so employed.

       *     *     *     *     *

Tallan Church is most romantic in its situation; it contains a curious
monument to one of the Bevilles. Polbenro, divided between this parish
and Lansallos, affords picturesque scenery superior to any on the
southern coast of Cornwall; and the whole road from Fowey to Looe, by
Polruan, Lansallas, Polperro, and Talland, will amply compensate the
fatigue of climbing hills, and descending into deep vales, by the
singular and striking prospects varied at every point.

The manor of Killigarth belonged at an early period to the family of
Kilgat, evidently implying some relation between the names.

Kilmenawth, or Kilmenorth, formed a part of the large possessions
belonging to Lord Chief Justice Trevilian, who was murdered under some
forms of law in the year 1388, the 11th year of Richard the Second.
This place was the residence of Admiral Sir Charles Wager.

The hamlet of Lemain or Lammana, which seems to have included a
considerable portion of the parish with the island, must have been of
importance, since a record exists, which states a division of the
monastic property of Glastonbury, between the bishop and his chapter
on one part, and the monks on the other, when about the year 1200,
Pope Innocent the Third removed the see of Wells to that place.

The words are, “De Prioratibus quoque ad Glastoniensem Ecclesiam
pertinentibus, ita ordinatum est. Ut Prioratus de Hibernia ad
ordinationem Episcopi, Prioratus vero de Basselake, et de Lamana ad
ordinationem conventus pertineant.”

Portlooe appears to have been the principal estate of the hamlet, but
no traditions are extant about its antiquity. It belonged about the
middle of the last century to Mr. John Hoskins of East Looe, probably
by purchase; he left an only daughter, who married first Mr. Edward
Buller, a brother of the Judge, This gentleman had been educated in
Holland according to the customs of those times, with a view to trade,
which however he never pursued, but settled on his wife’s barton of
Portlooe, and died there, leaving several children. Mrs. Buller,
nevertheless, married secondly Mr. Thomas Escott, an officer in the
Cornwall Militia.

The island has probably passed through different hands since the
dissolution of Glastonbury Abbey. It recently belonged to the family
of Mayow, by whom it was sold for a very trifling consideration, to
Sir William Trelawny, afterwards Governor of Jamaica.

Pel-Vellan, (the Mill Pool,) created and named by the late Colonel
John Leman, is an exquisite specimen of that gentleman’s taste. The
editor remembers it a wild uncultivated uninclosed common, adjacent to
the tide Mill. About twenty years after the commencement of
decorations, he placed the following inscription where a rill of water
formed a small cascade under the shelter of some shrubs, and of three
or four trees which had stood on the Down.

  Παρα την σκιην
  Καθισον· καλον το δενδρον,
  Απαλας σειει δε χαιτας
  Μαλακωτατῳ κλαδισκῳ·
  Παρα δ᾿ αυτῳ γ᾿ ερεθιξει
  Πηγη ρεουσα Πειθους.

Mr. Bond has given a detailed history of Admiral Sir Charles Wager,
pages 165 to 173.

The Admiral represented West Looe in Parliament, and resided in the
parish, but Mr. Bond has not been able to collect any traces of his
birth, either from tradition or from records. There is a monument to
his memory in Westminster Abbey, with a long and appropriate
inscription.

The barton and manor of Kyllygarth, including a division of Polperro,
are within this parish. The great tithes and the advowson belong to
the family of Kendall.

  Talland measures 2208 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £. _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815.
      The parish                            3,178   0   0
      West Looe                               563   0   0
                                           ――――――――――――――
                                           £3,741   0   0
                                           ――――――――――――――
  Poor Rate in 1831.――The parish              570   7   0
                      West Looe               129  13   0
                                           ――――――――――――――
                                             £700   0   0
                                           ――――――――――――――
  Population,―― in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
    The parish  {  709   |    801   |    839   |    841
    West Looe   {  376   |    433   |    539   |    593
                  ――――       ――――        ――――      ――――
                  1076       1234        1378      1434
    giving an increase on the parish of 10½ per cent., on West Looe 57
      per cent., on both together of 26 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. N. Kendall, instituted in 1806: he is also
    the patron. The net income of the vicarage in 1831 was £110. The
    impropriator of the great tithes is J. Graves, esq.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are similar to those of Lansallos and
Lanteglos near Fowey.


     [2] The common people believe these celts to be produced by
     thunder, and thrown down from the clouds; and that they shew
     what weather will ensue by changing their colour.




TAMARTON.


HALS.

Tamarton vicarage, alias North Tamarton, is situate in the hundred of
Stratton, and hath upon the north, part of Whitson; south, part of
Devon and Boyton; east, the Tamar river, from whence it hath its
denomination Tamarton, that is to say, the town situate upon the Tamar
river; which river on the Devonshire side gives also name to Tamarton
Decenna, or hundred there, as also to Tamarton vicarage parish, and
Tamarton chapel, situate on the banks of that famous river; as also
Stoke Damarell vicarage and parish. For Stoke Tamar-oll parish; that
is to say, Stoke chapel or college in Cornish British, in Devon; and
for the etymology of the word Tamar, see my Cornish Vocabulary, and
Liber I. Chap. III.

This is the ταμαρα ποταμος, the Tamara Potamos, mentioned by Ptolomy
the Greek geographer 1500 years past; that is to say Tamar fluvius,
flumen, amnis fluentum, the Tamar river, in the province of the
Cornavy, for Cornubia, or Danmonij.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this district was then taxed under the name
and jurisdiction of Hornacott, i. e. iron cot or house, so called from
Hornacott free chapel then extant there, and for aught I hear yet
standing. The present church of Tamarton is either of late erection or
endowment, since it is not mentioned in either of the inquisitions as
to its value of First Fruits, unless it passed as a daughter church to
some other, or was wholly impropriated. The parish rated to the four
shillings per pound Land Tax, for one year 1696, at £48. 16_s._ 4_d._
The manor of Tamarton was formerly the lands of Walesbury, by whose
heir it passed to Trevillian of Somerset, now in possession thereof,
as I am informed.

Upon the bastard King Athelstan’s victory over the Cornish Britons,
Anno Dom. 930; and dismembering from that regniculum the district of
Devon, and confining their dominion only to the west side of the river
Tamar, the Saxon poets triumphed in verse, one of which hath those
words of this division.

Hinc Anglos, illic cernit Tamara Britannos, i. e. on this side Tamar
beholds the English, on the other the Britons.


TONKIN.

Tamarton is in the hundred of Stratton, and has to the west St. Mary
Wike, to the north Whitstone, to the east part of Devonshire and the
river Tamar, to the south Boyton.

As for the name, it took it from the old Roman Tamara [which however
did not stand here, but at Saltash, a long way below. W.]; as that did
from the river Tamar, turned into the English termination, to signify
a town on the river Tamar.

It is not valued in the King’s Book, but in the Taxatio Benefic. anno
1291, 20 Edward I. this church, by the name of Capella de Tamerton, is
valued at 46_s._ 8_d._ and was formerly appropriated to ――――.

It is now a rectory, being endowed by the endeavours of the present
incumbent Mr. John Bennet; who, and his successors for ever, are to
pay a fee-farm rent to the crown of £6. 13_s._ 4_d._ out of the sheaf;
the patronage being alternately in Henry Rolle of Stephenton, and
Richard Coffin of Portledge, both in Devon, esquires. [The sheaf then
appears to have belonged to the Crown, and had been set by the Crown,
at £6. 13_s._ 4_d._ to its lessees the patrons. The chapel was
therefore inserted as a mere curacy in the last Valor, but has been
now endowed by the lessees giving up their lease to it, and so
improving their own patronage. W.]


THE MANOR OF TAMARTON.

This, in the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edward I. (Carew, fol. 48),
is valued in eight. In 3 Henry IV. (id. fol. 40 b.) Halvethas Malivery
held half of a knight’s fee here.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons gives the descents of property in this parish. He says the
manor of North Tamarton was given by Roger de Valletort to Richard
Earl of Cornwall, and that Roger Earl of Cornwall gave it to Gervase
de Harningate. It was afterwards in the Carminows. In 1620 it belonged
to Tristram Arscott, esq. and afterwards to the Rolles, of whom it was
purchased by the late Sir John Call of Whiteford.

The manor of Hornacot or Horningcote belonged at an early period to a
family of that name; in 1620 it was possessed by Sir Charles Howard,
in right of his wife, the daughter of Sir John Fitz of Fitzford near
Tavistock, and was afterwards in the Courtenays; and finally passed
from them by purchase to the late Mr. George Browne of Bodmin.

Ogbere, called by Norden Ugbere, was in his time the seat of William
Lovice, and had been the residence of Leonard Lovice, probably the
father or grandfather of William, and is stated, by a monumental
inscription still extant in the church, to have been Receiver-general
of the Duchy Revenues for Queen Elizabeth.

Vacye, in remote times the seat of a family bearing the same name, is
now the residence of George Call, esq. younger son of the late Sir
John Call.

This parish contains besides the church town three small villages
called Alvacot, Headon, and Venton.

  Tamarton measures 4788 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £. _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          2,115   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           330  13   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   403    |    420   |    479   |   517
    giving an increase of 28 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present incumbent, the Rev. C. P. Coffin, instituted in 1813.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The geological structure of this parish is the same as that of Boyton.




ST. TEATH.


HALS.

St. Teath is situate in the hundred of Trigg, and hath upon the north
Dundagell, south-east Michaelstow and Lantegles, west the Irish Sea,
or Trevelga, south-west St. Kewe and St. Udye.

As for the name, if St. Eata, alias St. Eatah, be the tutelar guardian
of this church, note that he was a Briton of Wales by birth, and
Bishop of Lindisfarne, predecessor of St. Cuthbert 678, who was
translated from thence to the diocese of Hexham, by the Latins called
Axelodunum; by Bede, Hagulstadiensis, and by us Hexhamshire, in
Yorkshire or Northumberland. He was succeeded by ten other Bishops,
who enjoyed his chair, till by reason of the Danish depredations it
was annexed to York, and made the see of the Archbishopric, and had
the reputation of a county palatine; but discontinued by the statute
of 37th Henry VIII. chap. 16, and annexed to the county of
Northumberland. In this see St. Etha sat six years after his
translation to Hexhamshire, as Bede saith, but two as others; and was
buried in his Cathedral Church there.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Dundagell. At the time of the inquisition of the
Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the value of Cornish Benefices
1294, this Church was not endowed, if extant. The parish is rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, £156. 8_s._

Bodanan, in this parish, was the lands of that old British family of
gentlemen surnamed de Cheiney, so called from Cheynoy in St.
Endellyan; of which place, name, and family was John de Cheyney,
Sheriff of Cornwall, the 5th and 6th of Edward I. 1280. Ralph de
Cheyney, his son or grandson, had £20 lands and upwards in Cornwall,
held by the tenure of knight’s service 24th of Edward III. Survey of
Cornwall, p. 51. Robert de Cheyney, probably his son, held also by the
tenure of knight’s service in this place, the fourth part of a
knight’s fee of land 3 Henry IV. idem liber, p. 42; whose son William
Cheyney, Esq. married the daughter and heir of [Stretch] in Devon,
lord of Pinhoe, and made it the place of his residence, and
accordingly was made Sheriff of Devon 11 Henry IV. 1410; John Cheyney,
his son, was Sheriff of Devon 22 Henry VI. 1444; John Cheyney, his
son, was Sheriff of Devon 1 Edward IV. 1480; John Cheyney, his son,
was Sheriff of Devon 12 Edward IV. 1472.

In this Church are to be seen the gravestones of some of those
gentlemen interred here, and in the same, and the glass window of this
Church, the arms of those gentlemen, viz. in a field Gules, on a fess
of four lozenges Argent, as many escallops Sable; in memory, as
tradition saith, that one of their ancestors, going into the Holy Land
and War with King Richard or King Edward I. carried such shells with
him for taking water to drink in the hotter clime of Asia.

Sir John Cheyney of this family was chosen Speaker of the Parliament 6
Henry IV. called indoctum Parliamentum, or Parliamentum indoctorum; so
called, for that in the writ of summons there was a clause no lawyer
should be chosen therein. Sir John Cheyney was also Speaker of the
House of Commons 1 Henry IV. and styled not only Parlour, but
Procurator, de les Commons. Hakewell’s Catalogue of the Speakers, p.
202.


TONKIN.

St. Teath is in the hundred of Trig, is bounded to the west by
Endellian and St. Kew, to the north by the sea and Tintagell, to the
east by Lanteglos and Michaelstow, to the south by St. Tudy.

I take St. Tathius to be the tutelar saint of this parish, of whom Mr.
Camden saith, (Brit. in Monmouthshire,) that he was a British saint,
who governed an academy at Caer Went, and also founded a church there
in the reign of King Kradock ap Ynir, circa an. Dom ――――.

This is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book £12.; the patronage in
the Bishop of Exeter; the impropriation of the sheaf in the heirs of
the late Matthew Beale, Esq.; the incumbent ――――.

In the Taxatio Benef. an. 1291, 19 or 20 Edward I. is this note,
Thechd, which, if meant for St. Teath, then it is valued, “Prebend’
Mag’ri Osberti iiij_l._ x_s._; Prebend’ Mag’ri W. de Wymondesham
iiij_l._ x_s._; Vicar’ ejusdem xx_s._”


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons gives in this parish, as in every other, the descents and
sales of lands.

The manor of Tregordock, formerly in the Mohuns, passed in the general
purchase to Mr. Pitt.

Mr. Agar, the Molesworth family, and Mr. Sandys of St. Minver, have
lands in this parish; and Mr. Trevanion, of Carhayes, possesses in
this parish either the whole or a part of Drillavale or Dinnavale
quarry, producing the finest and most durable roofing slate of all
that district; and said by Bishop Watson, in his Chemistry, to be the
very best in England.

Treveares was for a long time the residence of a family which began to
rise about a century ago into considerable opulence. Mr. Phillipps, of
this place, settled as an attorney in Camelford; and availing himself
of the valuable privileges possessed by that place, acquired a
fortune. He had three sons. The eldest son, Charles Phillipps, married
one of the coheiresses of the Longs of Penhele, and, not having any
family, transmitted her ample fortune to his brother; he represented
Camelford in Parliament, and was Lieutenant-Colonel of the Cornwall
Militia. The second son, Jonathan Phillipps, originally a surgeon in
the navy, married the coheiress of the Amys of Botreaux Castle, and
through them of the Cottons, and also of the Gilberts of Tacbear; this
gentleman had several children, but survived them all. He was knighted
on the celebrated occasion of Margaret Nicholson.

The third brother, William Phillipps, a clergyman, never married.

They had one sister, who married Mr. Carpenter, of Tavistock; and her
descendants are possessed of nearly the whole of the Phillipps
property.

This farm, however, was demised by Mr. William Phillipps to his
relation Mr. William Dinham.

It would be improper not to mention, that Captain William Bligh was a
native of this parish, who commanded the Bounty in the unfortunate
expedition to procure plants of the Bread-fruit tree (Artocarpus) from
the South Sea Islands in the years 1789 and 1790; but which object he
effected in a second voyage, and afterwards received the appointment
of Governor of New Holland.

There does not appear to be any remains of the College or habitation
appropriated to the Canons, who from receiving certain shares of the
tithe for their maintenance, were sometimes called Portionists. The
Church is conjectured to have been built in the reign of Henry the
Seventh, from the circumstances of his arms appearing there in a
manner to denote them coeval with the fabric.

There are several monuments, and among them one to Mr. William
Phillipps, probably father of the gentleman who removed to Camelford
as an attorney, and grandfather to the three brothers mentioned above.
He is stated to have been of Treveans, and to have died on the 12th of
April 1712, in the 62d year of his age. The turnpike road leading from
St. Columb by Wade Bridge and Camelford to Launceston, nearly
surrounds this Church. It was for some years the great line of
communication to the west of Cornwall, till in 1767 a commencement was
made on a more direct line over Tregoss Moors on one side of Bodmin,
and Temple Moors on the other. This road so entirely superseded the
former as to cause an entire loss of capital to those who contributed
towards making it; and the road itself fell back into a state of
repair inferior to that of most parish roads. It has, however,
recently been taken up as a new concern, and in 1835 a stage coach has
been established on it.

The Editor has heard from the Rev. William Phillipps, who died in
1794, that the making of this road was taken up as a matter of
patriotism; and that to assist the undertaking, he cut with his own
hands the figures on the granite mile stones, which still remain.

The entry of this parish, in the Taxation of Pope Nicholas, is thus:

  “Sech (and in a note, Eccƚia S[~c]e Thete) taxat’ ut sequitur.
                                     £.  _s._ _d._
  Prebend’ Mag’ri Osbt^i             4   10    0
  Prebend’ Mag’ri W. de Wymondeston  4   10    0
  Vicar’ ejusdem                     1    0    0”

  St. Teath measures 4,721 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as     £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815       5,041   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                        800   2    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   911    |    857   |    990   |  1280
    giving an increase of 40½ per cent. in 30 years.
  It is not improbable but that the 8 printed in the place of hundred,
    under the return of 1811, should have been a 9.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Joseph Fayrer, collated by the Bishop of
    Exeter in 1830.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is situated on rocks belonging to the calcareous series.
On the eastern boundary, however, near the church, the slate is nearly
connected with the porphyritic series; here at Treburget is a lead
mine in a blue pyrituous slate; the lodes run north-east and
south-west, varying from two feet to five feet in thickness. The
matrix of the ores consists of angular pieces of slate like fragments
cemented by quartz, in which galena, blend, iron pyrites, and spathous
iron occur.

Proceeding northward, this lamillar blue slate is succeeded by a
shining talcose slate; and at Rediver Mills on the road to Port Isaac,
a hard compact rock is quarried for the roads, which contains veins of
magnesian minerals; this rock occurs on the side of a steep
round-backed hill; and those circumstances, combined with the talcose
slate, render it probable that magnesian rocks may exist in the
neighbourhood. These rocks are succeeded by slate traversed by veins
of antimony, similar to what occurs in Endellion.




TEMPLE.


HALS.

Temple is situate in the hundred of Trigg, and hath upon the north
Brewar, south part of Cardenham and Warliggan, west Blisland, east
part of St. Neot and Altarnun. As for the name, it is derived from the
Latin Templum, and signifies amongst Christians, a church, chapel, or
temple for performing Divine Service or worship to God, by
contemplation or action of body or mind.

But here, in a more especial manner so called for, that this church or
chapel was a cell or temple pertaining to the great master of the
Knights Templars of Jerusalem, under its superior in the Middle Temple
of London, now the lawyers’ Inn, where was their chief manor or
commandery. This religious fraternity took an oath of confederacy, for
aiding and assisting all persons, pilgrims, and strangers, that
intended by way of Joppa to visit Jerusalem and the sepulchre of our
Saviour; who, for that by licence of the abbot of a church there
called the Temple, in which they had their seats (as is now used in
our churches), they were from thence called Templars.

This district now in Cornwall, consisting only of eight tenements of
land, and about thirty human souls, in the Domesday Book 1087, was
taxed under the jurisdiction of Nietstone, still contiguous therewith.
In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the
value of Cornish Benefices 1294, Capella de Templo was rated to First
Fruits at 10_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition it is not named. After the
dissolution of the Knights Hospitallers in England (to whom the lands
of the Knights Templars had been given) this manor of Temple fell to
the Crown.


TONKIN.

Temple. This little parish is in the hundred of Trigg, and has to the
west Blissland, to the south Cardenham and Warlegon, to the east and
north Brewer, alias Symonward.

It is so called, because it belonged formerly to the Knights Templars;
and lying in a wild wastrell, exempted from the Bishop’s jurisdiction,
many a bad marriage-bargain is there yearly slubbered up [now
precluded by the Marriage Act, which is bad in many points, but good
in this]; and grass widows with their fatlings put to lie in and nurse
here. [This practice still continues, and has given rise to a mode of
expression, which sends off unmarried but pregnant women to lie in
privately, by despatching them to the Moors, meaning that long range
of wilderness which is called Temple Moors. W.]

It is not valued in the King’s Book. In Tax. Ben. anno 1291, 20 Edward
I. it is by the name of Capella de Temple, 10_s._


THE EDITOR.

This church was certainly founded by the Knights Templars, in
compliance with a custom very prevalent among the military monastic
orders, of establishing Preceptories in desert and uncultivated
places, with the view of introducing inhabitants, or of civilizing the
few that might be scattered over a wilderness. The benevolent
intentions of these gallant knights failed however in this particular
instance: the parish, which, judging from the analogy of similar
cases, must have been large, perhaps co-extensive with the Moors to
which it imparted a name, has shrunk into one of the least in
Cornwall. Its church has disappeared. The churchyard is not
distinguishable from any other inclosure; and the few parishioners
resort to neighbouring churches for divine service, for marriages, or
for the administration of the sacraments.

Cultivation is, however, introducing itself by means of the potatoe, a
vegetable destined to produce most gigantic effects on the condition
of mankind; greater perhaps than any other cause arising from the
discovery of a new world.

This little settlement was probably attached to the manor of Trebigh
in St. Ive’s, where the Knights Hospitallers had a preceptory. Certain
it is that the two properties have since travelled together, and are
now jointly reposing with the Devonshire family of Wrey. The Rev. B.
W. Wrey was instituted to the benefice in 1789.

  Temple measures 936 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            156   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                             7  16    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    15    |    18    |    27    |    29
    about doubled in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This little parish rests entirely on granite, which is of the same
nature as that of Blisland, Cardinham, and the adjacent parishes.




ST. THOMAS.


HALS.

St. Thomas is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon the north
St. Stephen’s, east Launceston, south South Pedyrwin, west Egloskerry
and Trewinn. For the name, it is derived from the tutelar guardian and
patron of this church, St. Thomas the Apostle and Martyr (though as
some say St. Thomas à Becket). In the Domesday Book 1087, this parish
was taxed under the jurisdiction of Lansen, now Launceston. In the
inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, into the
value of Cornish Benefices, Capella Sancti Thomæ in decanatu de
Trigmajorshire, was then rated at 30_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition
1521, it is not named, having long before been wholly impropriated to
the abbat or prior of St. Stephen’s, who endowed it.


TONKIN.

St. Thomas is bounded to the south by Launceston and South Pederwyn,
to the west by Trewinn and Egloskerry, to the north by St. Stephen, to
the east by Launceston.

This little parish is something in the form of an obtuse pile, being
very narrow and wedged in to the east, where the church stands, in the
very extreme part, between Launceston and St. Stephen’s, but stretches
itself out in length and breadth to the west.

Part of it, which is called St. Thomas’s Street, is within the borough
of Launceston, and comes home to Launceston North Gate, but is divided
from Newport and St. Stephen’s by the little river Kensey, which runs
by the wall of the churchyard.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons treats of Launceston, St. Stephen’s, and St. Thomas
together. There is very little remarkable about this parish. The
church, which is very small, and provided with a tower scarcely more
lofty than the roof, stands close by the water; but it occupies the
spot where the stately Priory described under Launceston heretofore
extended its hospitality to travellers, and bestowed well intended,
although mistaken charity, to all the neighbourhood. Nothing more
remains of the Priory than the foundation of walls and an arched well
of excellent water. The church has some monuments.

  This parish measures 1750 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as      £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815. The
    parish and street                      2072  0    0
                                           ――――――――――――
  Poor Rate in 1831.      The parish        195 19    0
                          The street        143  9    0
                                           ――――――――――――
                                            339  0    0
  Population,――in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
  The parish, {   173   |    241   |    307   |    248
  The street, {   182   |    218   |    301   |    378
                 ――――       ――――       ――――       ――――
                  355        459        608        626
    giving an increase on the parish of 43 per cent.; on the street of
      107 per cent. on both together, of 76 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Minister, the Rev. C. Lethbridge, elected by the inhabitants
    in 1791.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish is composed of rocks belonging to the calcareous series,
and similar to those of Launceston, and of the adjacent part of South
Petherwin.




TINTAGEL.

This parish will be found under the name of Dundagell in the first
volume.




TOWEDNACK.


HALS.

Towednack is situate in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the
north the Irish Sea, east St. Ive’s and Lelant, south Ludgvan, west
Zennor.

In the Domesday Book this district was taxed under the jurisdiction of
Amall, now Amall Veor or Trenwith. In the inquisition of the Bishops
of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, into the value of Cornish Benefices,
Ecclesia de Tywidnick, in decanatu de Penwith, is rated at
cxiii_s._ iiii_d._ vicar’ ibidem, xxvi_s._ viii_d._ In Wolsey’s
Inquisition 1521, it goes in value, consolidation, and presentation,
with Lelant and St. Ive’s, £22. 11_s._ 10½_d._ The patronage in the
Bishops of Exeter, who endowed it; the incumbent ―――― Hawkins; the
rectory in Pitz; and the parish rated to the four shillings per pound
Land Tax, for one year, 1696, £51. 3_s._ 2_d._

In this parish are two notable camps, castles, or intrenchments of our
ancestors the Britons, wherein they fortified themselves against their
enemies in former ages, the ruins and downfalls of which are yet to be
seen, the one called Castle-an-Dunes,[3] or Denis (See St. Colomb.);
the other Tre-crag-an, the ragged rock town, situate upon Tre-crag-an
hill or mountain, as I take it.


TONKIN.

Towednack lies in the hundred of Penwith, and has to the west Zennor,
to the north the sea, to the east St. Ive’s and Lelant, to the south
Ludgvan.

I take the name of the parish to signify no other than St. Wednock or
Wynnock; for Ta and Da are synonymous terms for good. [It is perhaps
only Ti Widnak (C.) the Whitish House. W.] It is a daughter church or
chapel of ease to Lelant, and goes in the same presentation.


THE EDITOR.

There can scarcely be a doubt of this parish, Landewednack, and some
chapels, being dedicated to one of the Missionaries from Ireland.

Towednack, like most of the districts situated on granite, exhibits a
strange and almost unaccountable mixture of cultivated and of
unreclaimed soils. On one side of a fence may be seen land producing
abundance of grass and excellent for daisies, or bearing ample crops
of barley, and of clover hay and on the other side, an inclosed waste,
named throughout Cornwall a croft, producing nothing better than
the species or variety of furze, Ulex Nanus, and some of the most
coarse grasses.

This parish has been productive of much tin near the surface; but a
wide stripe of granite nearly resembling that of St. Stephen’s in
Brannel, extends from the parish of Zennor through Towednack, and
thence into Ludgvan, including Castle-an-Dinas, which Mr. Hals by
mistake places in this parish. Its course is distinctly marked by the
absence of all bolder rocks from the surface, and in some places it
has been wrought for china clay, found quite equal in quality to that
near St. Austell, but occurring in layers of but little breadth, and
therefore expensive to pursue. This soft granite, called by the miners
whetstone, permits the lodes to continue their courses through it from
the hard and crystallized granite, but the tin in a great measure
disappears at a trifling depth.

There is little connected with Towednack of any curiosity, that does
not refer to the Editor and his family.

I am possessed of a manor still extending into five parishes, of which
the vokeland, to use Mr. Hals’s term, was Amellibrea in this parish.
It has descended to me from the Noyes, and particularly from my direct
ancestor William Noye, the Attorney-General. I have the Court Rolls in
complete succession for nearly three centuries. On these Rolls the
names of Godolphin, Grylls, Mahun, Praed, St. Aubyn, Veal, occur with
others as free tenants, and a great number of persons held by copy of
Court Roll.

At Amellibrea are the remains of an extensive foundation said by
tradition to have formerly supported a prison.

But the free tenants have been lost, and the copyholds converted into
leases for life, as indeed has been the case generally over Cornwall,
with the exception of ecclesiastical property; the copyholds not being
renewable on the payment of a fine not exceeding two years’ value, as
is the custom over most parts of England, but dependent wholly on the
pleasure of the lord. The tenures were therefore in themselves much
the same; and as I remember to have heard, the tenants preferred
chattle property, as they termed it, to copyhold, in consequence
probably of the uniform rules of succession and the facility of
disposing by will.

The last copyhold that appears on the Rolls was in the very beginning
of the last century.

The particulars of holding a Court in those days, with the Steward’s
charge, happen to be preserved on the Roll for 1688, and seem to me
sufficiently curious to warrant their insertion.

       *     *     *     *     *

     At a Court of William Davies, esq. Lord of the United Manors of
     Amyll and Tillie, holden on Friday the 27th day of April, 1688.


     _The Homage._

       Sampson Veale, esq. Foreman.
       Robert Michell, James Trewhelow, John Curnow,
       Francis Quick, John Quick, John Williams,
       Oller Vaynfleet, John Baragwanath, John Trewhella,
       Anthony Quick, Christopher Trewhella, John Gilbart,
       George Beriman, James Quick.


     _The Oath._

     You shall swear that you, as Foreman of this Homage, with the
     rest, shall duly inquire, and true presentment make of all such
     copyholds and things as shall be given you in charge; wherein you
     shall spare no man, from love, favour, or affection; nor present
     any man for malice, hatred, or envy; but according as things are
     presentable, shall or may come to your knowledge, by information
     or otherwise, so shall you make thereof true presentment without
     concealment,

     So help you God, and the contents of this book.


     _The Charge._

     Sirs――You that be sworn!

     You know the customs of this court, and what you ought to
     present, which is grounded all on these three things, that is to
     say, upon  truth, judgment, and justice, for this comprehends all
     you have to do.

     It standeth upon truth, for that you ought to present nothing but
     the truth, and likewise not to omit any thing that is true and
     presentable being here unpresented.

     It standeth upon judgment, that you do not present any thing
     rashly, or unadvisedly; but certainly to know the truth thereof
     before you do present it.

     And it standeth upon justice that you do not for favour,
     affection, corruption of money, or other reward, for fear of any
     man’s displeasure, or for any private gain or profit, leave any
     thing unpresented that is here presentable; neither for malice
     present any thing contrary to truth.

     These three principal things you ought duly to consider of; and
     so hoping that you will have a special care thereof according to
     your oaths and duties, and the trust that is reposed in you, I
     will cease to trouble you any further about them.

     First, you shall inquire whether all such persons as owe suit and
     service to this court be here to do the same; and all that make
     default you must present.

     Also you shall inquire if any tenants be dead since the last
     court, or before, and his death not yet presented; and you shall
     inquire what lands he held of these manors, and what is due to
     the Lord on his death;[4] and also if any copyholder has leased
     his copyhold for any longer term than a year and a day, without
     the Lord’s license, it is a forfeiture of his copyhold. And also
     if any copyholder deny to pay his rent, or deny to come to his
     Lord’s Court, or deny to be sworn of the homage, it is a
     forfeiture of his copyhold.

     And also you are to present all alienations that you may know
     among the tenants, who they are, and for what.

     You are also to present all such as remove any bounds bounding
     the lands of these manors and the lands of any other Lord, or
     between tenant and tenant, or elsewhere in those manors.

     You are likewise to present any one that has taken any goods out
     of the pound wilfully by force, or any pound-breaker by the way,
     as they are driven to pound.

     You are likewise to present any man that hath fished or fowled in
     these manors, or hawked or hunted.

     And also you are to present any that doth refuse or neglect to
     grind at the mill of those manors; and if you are not well
     served, you that are ill dealt with by the miller, he is lyable
     to be prosecuted, and make satisfaction.

     You are to present all tin broken in these manors that hath not
     paid farme nor toll.

     You shall swear by the contents of that Book; that you will be
     true and faithful to the Lord of those manors, and shall from
     henceforth bear, do, and pay to your said Lord, and to his heirs,
     at times assigned, all such rents, customs, and services as you
     ought to pay, and for all such lands and tenements as you claim
     to hold of him; So help you God.

       *     *     *     *     *

As the Steward’s name in not appended, I am unable to say who was the
author of this perspicuous, eloquent, and argumentative address. It is
probably in a great measure conformable to the approved model of that
day.

       *     *     *     *     *

Having omitted to insert in its proper place a Petition from my
great-grandmother to King Charles the Second, I shall give it here, as
being in some degree connected with the property.


     _To the King’s Most Excellent Majesty._

     The humble petition of Hester Noye, widow of Humphrey Noye,
     esquire, son and heir of the Attorney-General Noye, and eldest
     sister and coheir of Edwyn Lord Sandys, deceased,

       Humbly sheweth,

     That King Henry the VIII. in the 14th year of his reign, created
     your Petitioner’s great-grandfather William Sandys a Peer of this
     Realm, by the style of William Lord Sandys, Baron of the Vine,
     who granted a Patent of the said honor to him and his heirs,
     which hath been ever since enjoyed by his descendants both male
     and female accordingly; and last of all by the said Edwyn Lord
     Sandys, who is lately deceased, leaving your said Petitioner and
     five other sisters his coheirs.

     That your Petitioner’s father served your late Royal Father of
     glorious memory in the late unhappy wars, and raised a Regiment
     of Foot, and another of Horse for that service, and was himself
     slain therein.[5]

     That your Petitioner’s late husband was likewise active in his
     late Majesty’s service, being a Colonel in the Army, and suffered
     very much for his loyalty in the late rebellious times, by whom
     your Petitioner had issue William Noye, esq. his son and heir,
     who is still living.

     Now forasmuch as your Petitioner is advised that upon the death
     of the said Edwyn Lord Sandys, it is in your Majesty’s power to
     dispose of the said honor to which of the said sisters and
     coheirs your Majesty pleases,

     Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays, that your Majesty would
     be graciously pleased to permit your Petitioner and her heirs to
     enjoy the said honour and title.

     And your Petitioner shall ever pray.

It is almost unnecessary for me to add that this Petition did not
prove successful.

Towednack is now included with Lelant in the borough of St. Ive’s,
sending one member to Parliament.

The great tithes belong to Mr. Praed of Trevethow, who, together with
the heirs of the late Duke of Bolton, possess the remainder of the
parish.

The parish feast is kept on the nearest Sunday to April 28.

  This parish measures 2,569 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1483   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           153   8    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    465   |    532   |    582   |    736
    giving an increase of 58 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The extreme northern part of this parish is formed of a narrow slip
which runs out considerably beyond the regular boundaries, and
terminates on the sea shore; about half of the protuberance is
composed of felspathic rocks, belonging to the porphyritic series, and
all the rest of the parish is situated on granite.


     [3] This is in Ludgvan.

     [4] An Inquisitio post mortem.

     [5] April the 6th, 1644.




TREMAINE, OR TREMEAN.


HALS.

Tremaine or Tremean is situate in the hundred of East, and hath upon
the north St. Mary Wike and Jacobstow, east North Pederwyn, south
Tresmere, west Treneglos. As for those names, they are of one
signification, viz. the town of stone, or stone town, a place, it
seems, notable for those inanimate creatures. This church was endowed
by the Abbat or Prior of St. Stephen’s by Launceston, to which abbey
it was wholly impropriated; the patronage was in ――――: the incumbent
――――; the rectory in ――――; and the parish rated to the four shillings
per pound Land Tax 1696, for one year £42. 5_s._ 0_d._ I take it this
church is now a chapel of ease to Egloskerry, altogether wholly
impropriated as aforesaid.


TONKIN.

Tremaine or Tremean is in the hundred of East, and is bounded to the
west by Warbstow and Treneglos, to the north and east by part of
Devonshire, to the south by Tresmere.

The name in Cornish signifies a dwelling of stone, or the stony town.
[Tre-maen, stone-house.]

It is a daughter church to Egloskerry. The great and small tithes are
wholly impropriated; and only £5 per annum allowed to the service of
the cure out of the sheaf, taxes included, which taxes ought to be
paid by the impropriators of the said sheaf.


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons says that the manor of Tremayne belonged to the family of
Treise, whose heiress brought it to that of Morshead; it has passed by
sale to Mr. John Jolliffe, the present proprietor; but the greater
part of the parish is within the manor of Penhele in Egloskerry.

The church of Tremaine, now a daughter church to Egloskerry, was
consecrated in 1481, by the name of the chapel of Winwolaus of
Tremene, with a cemetery adjoining, since which time it has probably
been esteemed a separate parish.

The benefice, as a daughter church to Egloskerry, is in the gift of
the Crown. G. W. Owen, esq. is impropriator of the great tithes, which
belonged formerly to the priory of Launceston.

Saint Winwaloe, whose festival is kept on the third of March, has been
noticed in vol. ii. p. 127.

  Tremaine measures 806 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            467   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            43   0    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {     91   |    122   |    125   |    118
    giving an increase of 28 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are the same as those of Boyton and Otterham.




TRENEGLOS.


HALS.

Treneglos is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon the
north Warstow, south and east Tresmere and St. Cleather, west
Davidstow. For the name, it refers to the church, and signifies a
stout, strong, robust or firm church. Under what name it was rated in
the Domesday Book I know not. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of
Lincoln and Winchester aforesaid, ecclesia de Treneglos was valued at
£7. vicar’ ibidem 20_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, it was rated,
together with Warstow, as to First Fruits, £9. 19_s._ 6_d._; the
patronage in the Duke of Cornwall I take it; the incumbent Wood; the
rectory in ――――; and the parish rated to the four shillings per pound
Land Tax 1696, together with Warbstow, as I remember, £87. 16_s._
which church is consolidated into Treneglos, and goes in presentation
with it.


TONKIN.

Treneglos is in the hundred of Lesnewith, hath to the west Davidstow,
to the north Warbstow, to the east Tremaine, to the south St.
Cleather.

The meaning of this name is no other than the church  town, the
common appellation which we give to all dwellings round or near the
church.

In 1291, 20 Edward I. the rectory here was valued (Tax. Ben.) at £7.
being appropriated to the priory of Tywardreath, and the vicar at
20_s._

It is a vicarage not valued in the King’s Book; the patronage in the
Crown; the incumbent Mr. Charles Porter.


THE EDITOR.

There cannot be a doubt as to Mr. Tonkin’s being the real etymology of
this name.

Mr. Lysons says, the greater part of the manor of Downeckney,
anciently Donnegny, which formerly belonged to the Dinhams and
Cardinhams, by descent from Richard, Steward of the household to
William the Conqueror at the time of the Domesday Survey, is now
vested in fee in William Braddon, esq. of Treglith in this parish, who
is lessee of the remainder; that remainder belonging in equal shares
to the Trefusis family from the Rolles and Walpoles; and to the
representatives of the Gilberts of Tacbear through Cotton and Amy. Mr.
Braddon inherited this property from his father-in-law John Spettigue,
esq. who had purchased it from the family of Symons, who resided at
Treglith.

The church of Treneglos was given by the above-named Richard, so early
as the time of the Conqueror, to the priory of Tywardreth. The great
tithes, with the exception of some endowed on the vicarage, belong to
the Eliot family of St. German’s.

The vicarage is in the gift of the Crown.

  Treneglos measures 2362 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1363   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           129   7    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    196   |    200   |    238   |    183

It is clear from the above figures, that there must have been some
mistake, since such fluctuations never take place in parishes entirely
agricultural.

The present Vicar of Treneglos, with Warbstow, is the Rev. J. H.
Mason, presented in 1804 by the Prince of Wales.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish lies on rocks of the calcareous series, except that its
southern extremity reaches the Downs, where the rocks become
felspathic, as has been noticed under the heads of Laneast,
Egloskerry, and St. Stephen’s.




TRESMERE.


HALS.

Tresmere, alias Tresmoore vicarage, is situate in the hundred of East,
and hath upon the north Tremayne, east Egloskerry, south Lanest, west
St. Cleather. Under what name or jurisdiction it was taxed in the
Domesday Book I know not. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester 1294, Capella de Tresmoore was valued xxvi_s._ viii_d._
which Church I apprehend was partly endowed by the Prior or Abbat of
Tywardreth, and the other part by the Prior of St. Stephen’s, for in
that Inquisition I read Prior Tywardrayth percepit de garba de
Tresmoore 11_s._ afterwards wholly impropriated to the Prior of St.
Stephen’s, who doubtless purchased in that title. The parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax for one year 1696, £42. 12_s._


TONKIN.

Tresmere, in the hundred of East, hath to the west Treneglos, to
the north Tremaine, to the east part of Devonshire, to the south
Egloskerry.

This signifies the same with Tre Mere, the great town or dwelling. [N.
B. This name, and that of Tren-eglos, are very remarkable in thus
containing a supplemental letter. W.]

This Church, by the name of Capella de Tresmore, an. 1291, 20 Edw. I.
is valued (Tax. Ben.) at xxvi_s._ viii_d._ being then appropriated to
the Priory at Tywardreath.

It is wholly impropriated, the great and small tithes belonging to Sir
John Molesworth and Francis Manaton, Esq. who ought to pay out of it
for serving the cure £6 per annum, lately detained by both, the Curate
not being able or willing to recover it at law. The Prior of
Tywardreth did receive out of the sheaf of Tresmore ij_s._


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons says, that this parish is an appendage to the manor of
Werrington. This would indicate its being impropriated by the Abbey of
Tavistock, as Werrington was the chief seat of the Lord Abbat; but
Tresmere is not noticed in the Valor Ecclesiasticus of that Abbey; but
in the Valor Ecelesiasticus of Launceston Priory there occurs this
trifling entry:

                     £. _s._ _d._
  Tresmare――Pensio   0   1    8

The tithes of this parish are completely in lay hands. When tithes
were first bestowed on monasteries, the duties of the Church to which
they appertained, were performed by members of the Convent, who
occasionally travelled there, and succeeded each other; the
“book-bosomed priests” of the Last Minstrel. In times more remote,
secular clergy went on circuits from the Cathedral or seat of the
Bishop and his priests; till the inconvenience of this itinerant
system became strongly felt, and decrees were made in several General
Councils of the Latin Church, enacting that each benefice should
have a permanently resident priest, and that a competent provision
should be made for his support. This was usually done by assigning to
the deputy, the Vicarius or Vicar, all the tithes except those of
corn, although others were occasionally retained; but in various
instances, instead of tithes, an allowance was made in money,
equivalent perhaps at the time, but long since reduced to nominal
payments, by the gradual depreciation in the value of gold and silver
from natural causes, and by the fraudulent reduction of the standards
practised in various degrees by all governments, or lastly, by the
non-convertible paper currencies.

The very great difference in the circumstances of those deputies,
arising from the nature of their endowments rather than any legal
distinction in the offices, has affixed to one the name of Vicar, and
to the other that of Perpetual Curate.

It appeared from Mr. Tonkin’s narrative, that the stipend in this
parish amounted to six pounds a year, and that it had been withholden
by superior force; without doubt, the liberality of modern times has
long since caused it to be restored and increased.

Mr. Lysons states, that the impropriation has passed through the
families of Molesworth and Manaton, and that it is now vested in
Edward Coade, Esq. and that this great piece of preferment is in the
Crown.

  Tresmere measures 982 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £. _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            588   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            50  12   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    129   |    154   |    173   |    171
    giving an increase of 32½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Perpetual Curate, the Rev. W. A. Morgan, presented by the Lord
    Chancellor in 1821.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The geology of this parish is in every respect the same as that of
Trenegloss.




TREVALGA.


HALS.

Trevalga Rectory is situate in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon
the north the Irish Sea and Ferabery, east Minster, south and west
Dundagell and St. Teth.

In the Domesday Book 1087, it was taxed by the name of Trevaga or
Trevalga. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester
1294, Ecclesia de Trevalga, in decanatu de Minor Trigshire, was rated
xxxx_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition £7. 6_s._ 8_d._ which probably was a
free Chapel, erected before the Norman Conquest; since it hath not
then or now admitted of any alteration of its name, though I judge
from that Inquisition, that it was after the Conquest partly endowed
by the Canons of the Cathedral Church of Exeter; since therein I read,
Canonicus Exon. percepit de Ecclesia Trevalga v_s._ The parish was
rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax for one year, 1696, £59. 4_s._
8_d._


TONKIN.

Trevalga, in the hundred of Lesnewith, is bounded to the west by
Tintagel, as it is to the north by the sea, to the east by Feraberry.

In an. 1291, 20 Edw. I. this Church is valued (Tax. Benef.) at xl_s._
and the Canons of Exeter did receive out of it v_s._

This Church is a Rectory, valued in the King’s Books £7. 6_s._; and
the patronage in the Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent ――――.


THE MANOR OF TREVALGA.

In Domesday Book this is mentioned as one of those given by William
the Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton, when he made him Earl of
Cornwall. In the extent of Cornish acres 12 Edw. I. it is valued in
eighteen.

[This manor, which has given name to the parish, has drawn its own
from Trev Alga, the noble house; Alga (I.) signifying noble, as in
Inis Alga, an old name for Ireland; and this affords one instance more
of the necessity of recurring to the kindred dialects of the British
in explaining Cornish names. W.]


THE EDITOR.

This parish is situated in the most wild and apparently most desolate
part of Cornwall, although the soil is not unproductive. The Church
stands near to the cliff of this iron-bound coast.

Mr. Lysons states, that the manor giving name to this parish, belonged
in the reign of King James the First to James Welsh, Esq. from it has
descended through the family of Bolitho to that of Stephens, and that
it now belongs to Mr. Richard Stephens, of Culverhouse, near Exeter.

The Dean and Chapter of Exeter are patrons of the Rectory. The present
Rector is the Rev. J. T. Symons, instituted 1831.

  Trevalga measures 1094 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £. _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815          1,024   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                            89   5   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    100   |    112   |    133   |   192
    giving an increase of 92 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are similar to those of the adjacent parishes
of Minster and Ferabury.




TREWEN.


HALS.

Trewen or Trewenn vicarage is situate in the hundred of East, and hath
upon the north and east Egloskerry and South Pederwin, south Lawanack,
west Altarnun. As for the modern names, it signifies a white town or
dwelling. The same, I suppose, in the Domesday Book 1087, taxed by the
name of Trewin, i. e. the beloved town. The value of this Church’s
revenues is not mentioned in any Inquisition, the same being wholly
impropriated by the Abbat or Prior of St. Stephen’s, who endowed it,
and was Patron thereof till the dissolution of the Abbey of St.
Stephen’s aforesaid, 26 Henry VIII. when it fell to the Crown; and the
parish rated to the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax for one year, 1696, £46.
8_s._ 8_d._

In this parish, September 29th, is held yearly a public fair or mart
for goods and cattle.

In this parish is Polyfunt or Polyvant, synonymous words, i. e. the
top spring or fountain of water, so called from some spring of water
that rises in some high lands of that tenement, in which place the
Prior of Minster in Kerryer, by the tenure of knight service, held one
little knight’s fee of lands of Morton, 3 Henry IV. Survey of
Cornwall, p. 41. It is now, as I am informed, the lands of ―――― Hicks,
Gent.


TONKIN.

Trewen, in the hundred of East, hath to the west Altarnun, to the
north Laneast, to the east Egloskerry, to the south Pederwin; as for
the name, the plain meaning of it is, the White Town, but from whence
so denominated I must plead ignorance.

[Tre Wen (C.) is the white or fair house, the manor house of the
district, so called from its elegance, and then lending its name to
the district and parish. W.]


THE EDITOR.

This parish is supposed to have belonged to the Priory of St. German’s
as an appendix to South Petherwin, to which it is now united.

Trewen is not noticed by name in the Valor Ecclesiasticus of the 26th
Henry VIII.; but South Petherwin, probably with the daughter parish
included, is there stated to have paid to St. German’s annually,

                   £. _s._ _d._
  Decim. Garb      15  13   4
  ―――― Feni         0  13   4

The great tithes belong to the University of Oxford, as does the
presentation to the vicarage through the Mother Church.

  This parish measures 868 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815            796   0    0
  Poor Rates in 1831                          134  11    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   193    |   190    |    206   |   213
    giving an increase of 10 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish is situated on rocks of the calcareous series, which are
for the most part like those of Laneast; but where Trewen joins
Alternun, bounded only by the small river Inney, some strata occur
which deserve more particular notice. It has already been stated, that
on the opposite side of this stream, a potstone or ollareous
serpentine occurs; on the Trewen side a talcose schist first appears,
which is followed by a calcareous schist, with its surface talcose and
glossy, resembling the slate at Cotele on the Tamar. This slate
gradually passes into a compact limestone, which is light-coloured and
talcose, especially in such parts as come in contact with masses of
hornstone diffused through the mass. This limestone is quarried and
burnt on the spot, but after the selection of such portions as abound
with calcareous spar.




TRURO.


HALS.

Truro is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath upon the north
Kenwen, east Clement’s, south an arm of Falmouth Harbour, where twice
a day, upon spring tides, the sea makes its navigable flux and reflux
to the walls, keys, and streets thereof.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this place was taxed under the appellations
of Trewret and Treured, which shews that it then consisted of two
privileged manors or jurisdictions, viz. the borough of Trewret and
the manor of Treured, now known, and still distinguished, by the
names of the borough and manor of Truro, under the like circumstances.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, into
the value of Cornish Benefices, Ecclesia de Trewroe, in decanatu de
Powdre, was rated liii_s._ iv_d._

By the Charter of its incorporation from King John, the town was
incorporated by the name of Burgus de Trewrow.

In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, this church’s revenues were valued at
£16. The patronage formerly in Bodrigan or Trenowith, now Edgecumb.
The incumbent Pagett; and the borough of Truro was rated to four
shillings per pound Land Tax for one year, 1696, £186. 7_s._ That here
was a Christian free chapel before the Norman Conquest I doubt not,
implied in the word Trewrow, now a Rectory Church; in the glass
windows of which, the north side thereof, is yet extant the arms of
John Earl of Cornwall, who succeeded to the Crown of England 1199, and
was made Earl of Cornwall by his father King Henry II. at nine years
old (though he had not the possession thereof till the time of Richard
I. 1190, which was but a hundred and twenty-four years after the
Norman Conquest, and but one hundred and three years after the
Conqueror’s death); which arms were: in a field Ruby, three leopards
in pale passant gardant Tophaz, over all a bend Sapphire, which
leopards are now called, and metamorphosed in the blazon of the Kings
of England’s arms to lions, as it is testified by Nicholas Upton, who
wrote his Book of Heraldry 1440, whose words be these: “Monsieur
Johanes Roy d’Angleter, port de Gowles, ove trois lyopers d’Or.”

There is likewise extant in the same windows, the Prince of Wales and
Duke of Cornwall’s badge, in a field ―――― three ostrich feathers with
this motto or inscription, Ich Dien, or Ich Thyen, Saxon, I serve,
which coronet was won by Edward the Black Prince, the first Duke of
Cornwall, from John of Luxemberge, King of Bohemia, at the battle
of Cressy, 1346, and ever since worn by him and his successors, Dukes
of Cornwall and Princes of Wales; which arms we may conclude was
erected in this glass window soon after that victory, he being High
Lord of this borough, which is held of his contiguous Duchy Manor of
Moris, together with the Coinage Hall, which King John built and gave
it; as also the royalty over the whole Harbour of Falmouth as far as
Carike Road and the Black Rock Island (see Falmouth) in consideration
of twelve pence rent and suits to that Manor Court, which privileges
and royalty this town enjoyed till the time of King James II. and
executed their water processes all over the said harbour for debt and
damage; but then, upon the petition of Sir Peter Killigrew, Bart. it
was given by him as an augmentation of profit to Mr. Quaram, Rector of
Falmouth, and his successors for ever, but under what rent I know not.

The church was built at the proper cost and charge of the inhabitants,
and other pious benefactors, with free-stone, in that costly and
curious manner as it now stands, in the reigns of Henry VII. and Henry
VIII. as appears from an inscription in the glass windows thereof,
under the name and arms of Margaret Tregian, one of those benefactors
1514; wherein also are yet extant the arms of the Arundells, Bevills,
Trenowths, Carmenows, Edgecombs, and other benefactors; however, this
church hath no tower or steple of bells as other churches.

And moreover, as when it was a free chapel, the minister subsisted on
the oblations and obventions of the altar, so now, comparatively, upon
the piety and charity of his hearers by voluntary subscriptions; from
whence it may be presumed the rector must demean himself well, and
labour hard in his vocation, to get a competent maintenance, at least
he must walk with such upright and wary conduct as he that went
barefoot upon the edge of a sharp knife and did not hurt his feet;
since he must converse with, and have to do with, men of divers
principles and opinions in religion in this place, viz. Anabaptists,
Presbyterians, and Quakers, as of old his predecessors had with monks,
Dominican and Franciscan friars, who were sharers or peelers of his
profits by their predicaments. I shall not enter into the controversy
whether the Gospel were better preached before churches were endowed
with revenues, or since, the one being a motive to pride, sloth, and
laziness; as the other is an inducement to humility, temperance, and
virtue.

In this church stands a curious monument erected to the memory of John
Robartes, esq. that married Gaurigan (ancestor of the Right Honourable
Charles Bodville, Earl of Radnor) though much defaced in the
interregnum of Cromwell; whose ancestor John Robarts, Mayor of Truro,
that lies entombed thereby, mightily enriched himself in this town by
trade and manufactures.

There is also near the same another funeral monument, erected to the
memory of three brothers of the Mitchells, tempore James I. viz.
Thomas, John, and James, as I remember, who, as the inscription saith,
had all one God, one womb, and one tomb.

On the west side of this town was of old a Dominican Chapel and
Friary; part of their house and consecrated well yet standing; their
revenues dispersed into several hands since the dissolution of their
house 26 Henry VIII. and now in possession of ――――.

In the centre of this town was a nunnery of Clares closed up, who had
considerable revenues, now in possession of Sir John Seyntaubyn and
others; their consecrated walled well at Edles in Kenwen, and their
house called Anhell, i. e. the hall or tabernacle, was fairly built of
free-stone, though lately pulled down, and converted to shops and
dwelling houses.

The town of Truro was made a coinage town by King John as aforesaid,
and had all its privileges confirmed by a charter from Queen
Elizabeth, by the name of the Mayor and Capital Burgesses; and
consists of a Mayor, Recorder, and twenty-four Capital Burgesses.
The members of Parliament are elected by the majority of inhabitants
of the said Corporation; the arms of which are, a ship man-of-war in
full course, with sails spread, on the seas, wherein are fishes
swimming.

The precept on the Parliament writ from the Sheriff, and a writ for
removing an action at law depending in this court leet, must be thus
directed:

     “Majori et Burgensibus Burgi sui de Trewrow in comitatu Cornubiæ,
     salutem.” als. “Manerium de Trewrow, viz. Senescallo et Ballivor.
     Manerij sui de Trewrow in Comitatu Cornubiæ, salutem.”

This place is more notable as being the birthplace and honorary title
of John Lord Robarts, Baron Robarts of Truro (see Lanhydeiock). It is
also privileged with fairs annually, on the 19th of November, the 8th
of December, Wednesday after Midlent Sunday, and on Whitsun Monday or
Tuesday, and markets weekly on Wednesdays and Saturdays; wherein all
commodities necessary for the life of man are vended in great plenty
at a moderate rate, viz. fresh fish, oysters, lobsters, and crabs of
all sorts, corn, fruits.

The salary of the collector of the Custom House here is yearly £40,
two tidemen and a waiter £80 per annum.

The chief inhabitants of this town are John Manly, esq. barrister-at-law;
Mr. Gregor, Dr. Maye, Dr. Cloake, Graduates in Physic; Mr. Hawes, Mr.
Hickman, Mr. Granvill Hals, Mr. Hickes, Mr. Herle, Mr. Sanders, Mr.
Mayow, Mr. Williams, Mr. Foxworthy, Mr. Grebhle, Mr. Pawley, Mr.
Michell, and others.

Mr. Carew, in his Survey of Cornwall 1602, tells us this town of
Truro, for wealth and riches, exceeded any other town in Cornwall, and
for buildings all other except Lanceston; I think it still under the
same circumstances.

In this town at some time lived Captain William Upcott that married ――――
Bruce of Scotland, daughter of Edward Bruce, esq. of Edinburgh; after
her death, Anne, daughter of Adam Bennet, of this town, gent. son
of John Bennet, of Penton in Devon, gent. a man of approved valour and
conduct in the war, who in all the unhappy Civil Wars between King
Charles I. and his Parliament, was bred up in the school of Mars from
his youth, first an Ensign, then a Lieutenant, lastly made a Commander
of a foot company under the Earl of Essex and Sir Thomas Fairfax’s
armies for the Parliament; afterwards he was made Coronet of General
Monk’s Horse Troop or Brigade, who specially favoured him, and in that
capacity accompanied him throughout all the fatigues of the English,
Scots, and Irish wars, managed by him and Cromwell against Kings
Charles I. and II.; and when Monk came out of Scotland and returned
into England with his army, and restored King Charles II. to his
throne.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Truro is situate in the hundred of Powder, and is surrounded to the
south, west, and north, by Kenwin, and to the east by St. Clement’s,
being washed on each side by two rivulets (of which that which comes
from St. Allen is the principal), and which joining together at the
bottom of the town, fall into an arm of Falmouth Harbour, and form a
beautiful basin and key there. This takes its name from the town, as
that does from the three principal streets of which it consists, Tri,
three, and Ru, a street, turned to Truro, euphoniæ gratiâ. [See below
concerning this Etymon, which is adopted from Camden, and is obviously
absurd, as the town must have had a name long before it forked out
into three streets; and indeed from the first moments of its existence
as a town, as a parish, or as a manor. W.]

This church, which is dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary, is a
rectory, valued in the King’s Book £16; the patronage in the
Honourable Richard Edgcombe, esq.; the incumbent Mr. Joseph Jane,
who in 17―― succeeded Mr. Simon Paget, as this last did Mr. Samuel
Thomas.

In an. 1291, 20 Edw. I. this church was valued (Tax. Benef.) at
liij_s._ iiij_d._ having never been appropriated.

Leland (Itin. vol. III. fol. 11) speaketh thus of this town: “This
Creke of Truru afore the very toun is divided into two partes, and
eche of them hath a brook cumming down, and a bridge, and the toun of
Truru bytwixt them booth. The White Freres house was on the west arme
yn Kenwyn Streate.

“Kenwen Streate is severed from Truru with this arme, and Clementes
Streat by est is separate on the est from Truru with the same arme.

“One paroche chirch in Truru; Kenwen, and Clementes Streates have
several chirchis, and bere the name of the Sainctes of the paroche
chirchis.

“Coynage of tinne at Midsomer and Michaelmas at Truru.

“Truru is a borow toun, and priviledged. There is a Castelle, a
quarter of a mile by west out of Truru, longing to the Erle of
Cornwale, now clene doun. The site therof is now used for a shoting
and playing place. Out of the body of Truru creake, on the est side,
breketh a crek estwarde a mile from Truru, and goith up a mile ――――,
perhaps to Kigan, and thens to Tresilian Bridge.”

Nothing can be better described than the situation of this town is
here by Leland; only as to the castle, it is so far from being a
quarter of mile out of the town that it is in it at the head of St.
Pancras-street, to the left hand of the way as you go to Kenwyn
church, which by the bye is no Saint as Leland has here made it, or
ever called St. Kenwyn. [The difference between Mr. Tonkin and his
author concerning the castle, is no difference at all. Mr. Tonkin
forgets the interval of time between Leland’s writing and his own. At
that time the castle was assuredly out of the town; St. Pancras-street
then going up but a little way from the open area by the church-yard,
and the castle being now “at the head” of this street.] It lies
very pleasantly, and from it you have a view of the whole town, the
country around it, and the river, or rather arm of the sea, which,
when the tide is in, looks like a fine canal of two miles in length,
[and in coming up the canal by boat, the town with its new spire
below, and the church of Kenwin with its new vicarage-house above,
form a most pleasing view]; but the castle itself is more like an old
Danish camp or round, than a place that had been once inhabited, there
not being the least sign left of any wall, &c.

At the last visitation of this county (Heralds’ Office) it is said
that “the town and borough of Truro was incorporated by the name of
mayor and burgesses by Reignald Earl of Cornwall, natural son to Henry
I. which as appeareth by record, was done by Richard Lucy alias Lacam,
testibus Rogero de Valitort, Roberto de Edune Anvilla, Ricardo de
Raddona, Aldredo de S^{to}. Martino, sealed with an ancient seal with a
man on horseback.

“And at the time of this present visitation, the 9th of October 1620,
was Gregory Frignis Major, Thomas Burgess, Richard Daniell, James
Lawarren, William Catcher, aldermen, Everard Edmonds, Henry Williams,
Edward Kestell, William Avery, Walter Penarth, Germaine Grees, Francis
Noseworthy, Francis Gregor, Cuthbert Sidenham, Humphrie Sidenham,
Gawen Carverth, Thomas Burgess, jun., Richard Hill, John Adlington,
Nicholas Paule, Edward Grosse, Robert Kemp, Nicholas Stephens, John
Pernall, and William Cosens, burgesses, Hugh Boscawen, esq. recorder,
and John Michell, town-clerk of the said borough and corporation.

“We find also that the Mayor of Truro hath always been, and still is,
Major of Falmouth, as by an ancient grant now in the custody of the
said Mayor and Burgesses doth appear.”


WHITAKER.

Here I shall add some remarks that will illustrate the origin of this
town more than Mr. Tonkin has done.

Truro takes its name from its castle. This, in Leland’s time, belonged
to the Prince of Wales as Earl of Cornwall, and was therefore one of
the castellated palaces of the Cornish Earls; it was only a small one,
however. This the ground of it shows when the walls are gone. Even in
Leland’s time, it was “clene doun;” and the area was used as a place
of exercise for shooting with bows and arrows, and for other
diversions. It “is now,” says Mr. Tonkin, “more like an old Danish
camp or round than a place that had been once inhabited.” What ideas
Mr. Tonkin had of an “old Danish camp,” I cannot say; but the castle
carries no appearance of a camp at all, either Danish, Saxon, or
Roman. Nor is it more like a round, if by “a round” Mr. Tonkin means a
Cornish one, like the amphitheatrical “round” of Piran. The only
remains of the castle, indeed, are the name, a waste area, and the old
mount or keep, the earth of which is nearly gone, and is daily
vanishing by application of it to other purposes. This artificial
mount marks the centre of the castle, had the main tower upon it, and
constituted the principal part of the whole; and a small ward must
have gone round it, standing on the natural ground, and forming the
offices to this petty palace.

This was plainly the origin of the town:――where an ancient Earl’s
house was, however small in its extent, and however occasional in its
use, it naturally drew the traders of the country to it. The wants of
such a Lord’s household, and the accompanying treasury of a kingdom in
a county, created such a call for wares, and produced such a currency
of wealth, as made it for its season the little centre of trade to the
adjoining country; and a town grew up in time, the weakly child of its
castle at first, but able to subsist without the castle at last. Such,
undoubtedly, was the origin of Truro. This lay upon the more westerly
of the two currents; the westerly side of the town, therefore, would
be the primitive and original part of it; accordingly, we see the
White Friars’ house constructed with it. From this current it
extended, as it enlarged, to the easterly one. The erection of a
church on that side, when a district was taken out of Kenwin parish,
and the peninsulated ground between the currents was formed into a
parish of itself, drew it easterly with great power. The town
consisted at first, probably, of the street running from the foot of
the hill on a part of which the castle stood, and extending backwards
with its yards and gardens to the western current; and this part of
course adopted the previous appellation of the castle, and was called
with it Tre-vereu, Tre-ureu, or Truru, Treuro, or Truro, the house or
castle upon the Uro or Uru, the same denomination of a river with that
of the Vere in Hertfordshire, the Vera-lamium of the Itineraries, the
Uro-lanium of Ptolemy, and with that of the Eure in Yorkshire, the
Uluracum, and the Is-urium of the geography and itineraries.

So originating from the castle, in that primary part of the whole, the
western side of the town, and in that most primary point of all, the
line of houses above, the town would naturally shoot out next in the
line of houses opposite to this on each side of the opening towards
the church, and beside the church on each side, drawn on by the strong
attraction of the church itself. The roads into the town from east and
west would then allure it down to their respective passes over the
current; the road from the west then coming down, as it still does, at
the bottom of the first line of houses; and that from the east coming
within these thirty years by the narrow street near the church, at the
corner of which is the rectory-house. The town would then extend from
the western access into it, in a street of houses running at right
angles with the original street of the whole, and pushing directly in
a line from the access. These must have been the three streets from
which Camden supposed the name to have been derived: “Truro,
Cornwallice Treuru, a tribus plateis dictum,” (page 138); but this
last street was afterwards split by the corporation into two, by the
erection of a town-hall above and a market-house below, along the
middle of it. In this state stood the town probably for some time,
with the continuance of this middle row of buildings, with the
erection of a coinage-hall for tin a little beyond the termination of
it, and with the extension of the two original sides of this third
street up to it. It then stretched up the hill towards the castle,
ranged over the confining currents on the east and west, into the
parishes of St. Clement’s and Kenwin, and expatiated down to the quay
and beside it. It ranged over the western current, now probably
covered with a bridge, before it pushed up the hill towards the
castle, as that line of houses is called Kenwin-street, even by
Leland, and this is denominated St. Pancras-street by Mr. Tonkin; that
was then the way, the circuitous way to Kenwin Church, when this is
the direct way, and the present; and the principal alteration which
has happened to Truro since, has resulted from the erection of a new
bridge over the eastern current, longer and grander than the other, a
few yards lower in the channel than it, lining with the eastern road,
and leading directly to the Town-hall and market-house. This naturally
produced a Bridge-street, leading up at one end of the Coinage-hall,
so falling into what was then the principal stem of the town, and thus
communicating with all the branches; and all will be consummated in a
few years by executing an Act of Parliament which has already passed,
in taking down that middle row of buildings which is formed by the
town-hall and its accompaniments, restoring this street to its
original width, and multiplying houses for the dislodged inhabiters in
the extreme parts of the town.

When the church was originally built I know not, but it was then
dedicated to St. Pancras, I apprehend, though it is now to St. Mary,
as the street leading down to one corner of the large area at it,
which is popularly denominated Pider-street at present, is still
denominated St. Pancras-street by Mr. Tonkin; but the present church
of St. Mary is of that light and elegant sort of Gothic architecture
which took place among us in the reign of Henry VII. and which perhaps
might be wished to have still continued among us, as being a happy
union of the solemn solidity of the Gothic and of the luminous
lightness of the Roman. At this period the church must have been
built, the architecture of London by degrees reaching out its
influence into Cornwall; and accordingly in the southern window, which
is the third from the east, is a date of 1518.

But let me be more particular concerning the antiquity of Truro. The
castle is not mentioned in Domesday Book;[6] it was therefore later
than the Conquest. It was built by some of the Norman Earls of
Cornwall, and was one of the rural palaces, as it were, which they had
in the county subordinate to their grand capitals at Launceston,
Tremarton, and Restormel. The town must be still later than the
castle; yet it is noticed within a century after the Conquest, so
nearly coeval was it with its cause, the castle. It is noticed above
to have been in the possession of Richard de Lucy. It was
incorporated, says the Visitation above, “as appeareth by record, by
Richard Lucy, alias Lacam.” “Truro, Truru, or Trevereu,” adds that
best investigator of our constitutional antiquities, because the most
grounded on the evidence of records, Dr. Brady, “was some time in the
possession of Richard de Lucy, a person of great note in the reigns of
King Stephen and Henry II. in the eighth of whose [Henry’s] reign,”
or, an. Dom. 1162, “he was made Justice of England.”[7] This Richard
had got possession of this part of the old estates of the earldom,
either by one of those half-alienations, which were only
sub-infeodations in reality, or (as we shall soon see) by being Earl
of Cornwall himself. He actually resided in the castle, as he is
styled in an instrument of Henry the Second’s, “Ricardi de Lucy
de Trivereu;” and he encouraged the little town of the Earls, by
incorporating it, and so giving it a legal dignity in granting it an
internal jurisdiction. He even proceeded to allow it that last and
highest privilege of a borough, a freedom of exemption from toll; nor
was this confined to the borough itself; it extended beyond it; it
extended into all the country round; it was commensurate with the
whole county; and Richard must, therefore, have acted with a power,
not merely of the lord of the borough, but of the earl of the county,
as no one less than an earl could have given such an ample sweep of
exemption. The proof of all this lies in the original charter of the
town, not now in existence, but referred to in a succeeding charter,
and particularised so as to be equal to the very charter itself. The
town thus began about the year 1100, was incorporated about 1130
perhaps, and was made a free borough (as we shall instantly see)
before 1140.

In the reign of King Stephen, who came to the throne in 1135, and in
the fifth year of it, or 1140, Lucy resigned up the possessions of the
earldom; as then, “Reginald Fitzroy, who was one of the illegitimate
sons of King Henry the First, was created Earl of Cornwall.”[8]
Reginald was, therefore, invested with all that Lucy had possessed.
This he retained till his death, which happened in the 21st of Henry
II.[9] or the year 1175. We accordingly find him extending his more
than half-royal graces to his borough of Truro, by granting it a
charter confirmatory of the privileges which Lucy had conceded to it
before. “The town and borough of Truro,” says the Visitation, “was
incorporated by the name of the Mayor and Burgesses, by Reignald Earl
of Cornwall, natural son to Henry the First (which, as appeareth by
record, was done by Richard Lucy, alias Lacam), testibus Rogero de
Valitort, Roberto de Edune Anvilla, Ricardo de Radiona, Aldredo de
St. Martino, sealed with an ancient seal, with a man on horseback.”
This description shows the charter to have been actually inspected by
the visitors; yet Dr. Brady knows it only from the recital of a
subsequent charter.[10] The original is lost in the Tower, I suppose,
while its counterpart is preserved at Truro; and it runs thus in the
Inspeximus, 13 Edw. I. No. 61. “Reginaldus Regis Filius,” not as in
descriptive terms the son of the King, but merely as a personal and
family appellative, Fitzroy, “Comes Cornubiæ; omnibus Baronibus
Cornubiæ, et omnibus militibus, et omnibus libere tenentibus, et
omnibus tam Anglicis quam Cornubiensibus, salutem. Sciatis, quod
concessi,”――a word that shows even confirmatory charters to do, what
our legal antiquaries are naturally unaware that they do, to use the
language of granting just as if they were original charters, and so
leave us to decide from other circumstances, which are original and
which confirmatory――“Liberis Burgensibus meis de Trivereu,” where the
note of previous freedom in the Burgesses proves them to have been
already freed from toll, “habere omnes liberas consuetudines et
urbanas,” the same exemption from toll that all cities (which were in
the King’s demesne) had, “et easdem in omnibus quas habuerunt in
tempore Ricardi de Lucy,” a plain evidence that they had “free
customs,” and that they themselves, therefore, were “free Burgesses”
in the time of Richard de Lucy, “scilicet Sacham et Socham, et Tholl
et Them, et Hinfangenethuf [Infangthief],” that is, all those rights
of judicature over themselves, and over others who came among them,
that then belonged to all the manorial courts, and that were
necessarily given to the Burgesses of Truro when they were
incorporated, and by incorporation were enabled to exercise a
jurisdiction independent of the common officers of justice: “et
concessi eis, quod non placitent in Hundredis, nec Comitatibus, nec
pro aliquâ summonitione eant ad placitandum alicubi extra villam
Trivereu,” a privilege consequent upon the grant of an internal
jurisdiction, and necessary to its completion: “et quod quieti sint de
Tholneo dando per totam Cornubiam, in feriis et in foris, et ubicunque
emerint et vendiderint,” a privilege which must have been a very
valuable one to a society of traders, and the more valuable from its
long reach over all the fairs and markets of the county: “et quod, de
pecuniâ eorum accreditâ et non redditâ, namium capiant in villâ suâ de
debitoribus suis,” by distraining the cattle, and arresting the
persons of their debtors, that came into the town, though they did not
belong to it.[11] This charter is without a date; with so many and
such witnesses no date being necessary; and as it must have been prior
to the Earl’s death, it was before the year 1175.

Henry the Second confirmed Reginald’s charter, as Reginald confirmed
Lucy’s; and all were re-confirmed by Edward the First in 1284.[12] But
in all these charters, we have no intimation of that grand privilege
which we are sure Truro to have possessed, and which is alluded to in
the Visitation above. “We find also,” says the Visitation, “that the
Mayor of Truro hath always been, and still is, Mayor of Falmouth, as
by an ancient grant, now in custody of the said Mayor and Burgesses,
doth appear.” The superiority of Truro over all the harbour of
Falmouth we see is here attested by a record of 1622; and “an ancient
grant, now in the custody of the Mayor and Burgesses,” is appealed to
by the record. This distinguishing privilege had been ceded to Truro
by a grant of a particular nature; but from the manner in which the
Visitation refers to it, the grant must have been so early as to be
without a date, and so be like Reginald’s and Lucy’s charters before;
and it was probably, therefore, about the same age with them.
[WHITAKER.]


THE EDITOR.

Truro has long claimed to be the first town in Cornwall; and the
station has generally been allowed, although several others exceed it
in beauty of situation. Penzance in that respect, as well as in
foreign trade and the magnitude of its internal commerce; and Falmouth
in the number of inhabitants.

Truro, situated adjacent to the largest mining district, at the head
of a navigable river, and nearly in the centre of population, has
acquired the lead in all county concerns, and has the good fortune to
possess many large handsome houses, and breadth of streets unknown in
the other towns. Here, too, for a long series of years, was situated
the chief place of education for the heirs of Cornish families, at a
time when the state of communication between places two or three
hundred miles apart, rendered it a matter of serious importance to
think of sending a lad to either of the public schools. Two very
eminent masters of the school at Truro are still remembered, Mr.
Conor, a layman, from the north of England, or Scotland, by the
tradition of our fathers; and the Rev. Dr. Cardew, by some among the
best classical scholars in both Universities. There is a monument to
Dr. Cardew in St. Erme Church. It is also understood, that their
predecessor, Mr. Jane, either established or maintained the reputation
of this school. Mr. Jane is understood to have been a native of
Leskeard, and a nephew of Doctor William Jane, Regius Professor of
Divinity at Oxford and Dean of Gloucester, who drew up the strong
Declaration adopted by the University in favour of the principles
which would have retained King James on the throne of England, and
when the Revolution was effected, supported the opposite side, which
gave occasion to the following epigrams:

  Decretum figis solenne, Decanus ut esses;
    Ut fieres Præsul, Jane! refigis idem.

  Decretum statuit spe――spe meliore revellit;
    Quàm rectâ Janus pingitur arte bifrons!

The Rev. J. Jane, son of the gentleman who kept the school at Truro,
became a student and tutor at Christ Church, from whenee he retired to
the college living of Iron Acton in Gloucestershire.

Truro has produced its fair proportion of men distinguished by their
proficiencies in literature, arts, sciences, and arms. Of persons
living, I would select the Rev. Richard Polwhele, as an eminent
historian, poet, and divine; and the Right Honourable General Sir
Hussey Vivian, companion in arms of the Duke of Wellington, an active
partaker in the glories of Waterloo, since commander-in-chief of
Ireland, and now (1836) occupying, perhaps, the highest office of the
government not included in the cabinet.

An individual, little if at all remembered, emanated from Truro in the
sixteenth century, if he was not born there. Wood says, in the Athenæ
Oxonienses:

“Thomas Farnabie, the most noted schoolmaster of his time, son of
Thomas Farnabie, of London, carpenter, son of ―――― Farnabie, sometime
Mayor of Truro in Cornwall, was born in London about 1575, and became
a Student of Merton College in 1590; but being wild he made no long
stay there, but left the college very abruptly, and went into Spain,
and was for some time educated in a college belonging to the Jesuits.
He left them, however, and being minded to take a ramble, went with
Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkyns in their last voyage;
afterwards, it is said, he was a soldier in the Low Countries. Having
suffered great distress after his return, he at last succeeded in
establishing a school in Goldsmiths’ Rents, near Red Cross Street in
London, where at one time he made up a number exceeding three hundred
generous youths. At length, upon occasion of some sickness, he removed
about 1636 to Sevenoaks in Kent, in the neighbourhood of which place
(at Oxford) he had purchased an estate, and taught there the sons of
several neighbouring gentlemen, by which he acquired considerable
wealth, and purchased another estate near Horsham in Sussex. He
suffered some loss and imprisonment in the Civil War on account of his
taking the Royalty side, and died at Sevenoaks, where he is buried, in
the chancel of the church, with the following inscription:

  “P. M. Viri ornatissimi Thomæ Farnabii Armigeri, causæ olim Regiæ,
  reique publicæ, sed literariæ vindicis acerrimi, obiit 12 Junii 1647.

    “Vatibus hic sacris qui lux Farnabius olim,
       Vate carens saxo nunc sine luce jacet.”

     His principal works are,
  Notes on the Satyrs of Juvenal and Persius.
  Notes on the Tragedies of Seneca.
  Notes on Martial’s Epigrams.
  Notes on Lucan’s Pharsalia.
  Notes on Virgil.
  Notes on Terence.
  Notes on Ovid.
  A System of Grammar.
  Index Rhetoricus and Oratorius.
  Phrasiologia, Latin and English.
  Anthology of Greek Epigrams, with a Latin Translation.
  Tables of the Greek Language.
  Various Letters to Learned Persons.

Boyle says of him in his Dictionary, that Farnaby was a learned
classic, and that his notes on the greater part of the ancient Latin
Poets have been of much use to young persons; that he dedicated his
Horace to Prince Henry, the eldest son of King James the First, and
that he was most favourably received by the Prince when he presented
his work; and that he received an order, or a request, to make similar
commentaries on all the Latin Poets, in anticipation, in some degree,
of the great work afterwards executed for the King’s son in France.

       *     *     *     *     *

But the most remarkable and striking feature in the history of Truro
consists of the great wealth acquired there by various families in
succession during a long series of years.

The first on record is the family of Roberts, or Robartes, who are
said to have began their career by retail trade in a house remaining
at the commencement of this century, near the north-western extremity
of what has been made the great street, by the improvement of taking
down the middle row of houses, noticed by Mr. Whitaker, and completed
by a new street leading from it southward towards Penryn and Falmouth.

It is possible that the very humble commencement of the Roberts’s
fortunes may have been invented since their splendid elevation, to
augment the wonder; but certain it is, that they resided for several
generations in Truro, conducting extensive mercantile concerns, and
accumulating capital, rather than obtaining it by any sudden effort;
and employing their savings in the acquirement of land by great or
small purchases, or more frequently, perhaps, through the medium of
advancing money on mortgage, till they acquired the most scattered
estate of any in the county. About the reign of James the First, this
family rose into high consideration; they acquired an hereditary seat
in Parliament, in a manner not very honourable at least to the Duke of
Buckingham, and afterwards became decorated with the nominal office of
Earl of Radnor: held the Lord Lieutenancy of Cornwall, with the Lord
Wardenship of the Stannaries; and, lastly, the office of highest
dignity in the gift of the Crown, the Vice-Royalty of Ireland.

The next considerable family emerging from Truro was the Vincents; in
their case the practice of law was added to trade; they repeatedly
represented Truro in Parliament, and were among the first people of
the county. One of their seats was Tresimple in St. Clement’s, now the
property of Mr. Vivian, of Penkalenick in the same parish; but the
family of Vincent has disappeared, and their very memory is almost
extinguished.

After the Vincents will come the Gregors, who have now been for a long
period country gentlemen. The late Mr. Francis Gregor represented the
county in three successive Parliaments, from 1790 to 1806, when he
retired on account of ill health.

The next large fortune acquired at Truro was by Mr. Lemon. A short
account of this very extraordinary person has been given under Germoe
parish. His very splendid career, not merely of acquiring wealth, but
of high reputation for himself and of benefit to his country, began in
the neighbourhood of Penzance; and his removal to Truro is understood
to have been occasioned by the discernment of Mr. Coster, a gentleman
concerned in copper smelting works at Bristol, and a representative in
Parliament for that city.

Mr. Coster greatly augmented his fortune by purchasing the copper ores
of Cornwall, for some time without a competitor; and undertaking to
work some of the Gwennap mines in depth for copper, which had
previously been productive of tin, he selected Mr. Lemon for one of
his partners, with unlimited confidence in managing the whole concern.

Mr. Lemon was succeeded by Mr. Daniell, who took the whole of his
great mercantile concerns off the hands of Mr. Lemon’s executors in
1760, having acquired the command of capital by his marriage with Miss
Elliot, niece of Mr. Allen, of Bath. The late Mr. John Vivian acquired
also a large fortune residing in Truro; and of persons now living,
several might be added to the list.

Mr. Richard Hussey has been noticed in the parish of Feock as an
eminent lawyer, and likely to have attained some of the highest
honours of the profession; he died unmarried in 1770. His father, who
practised in Truro as an attorney, was the son of the Reverend John
Hussey, vicar of Okehampton in Devonshire.

The late Mr. John Thomas may also be included among those who have
acquired fortunes and displayed ability at Truro: after retiring early
in life to Chiverton, a paternal property in Perran Zabuloe, where he
built an excellent house, Mr. Thomas was placed in the honourable
office of Vice-Warden, which he executed with great credit for more
than thirty years.

Among persons distinguished for talents, one cannot omit Mr. Samuel
Foote; he was born here about the year 1720, although the family seat
was Lambessa, in the adjoining parish of St. Clement. His mother was
the sister of Sir John Dinely Goodere and of Samuel Goodere, a Captain
in the Navy, whose history almost equals in depth of misery the
well-known tragedy of Penryn; and it is a curious circumstance that
Mr. Foote’s first publication is a complete narrative of this most
melancholy affair, in a pamphlet signed with his name, and addressed
to Henry Combe, Esq. then Mayor of Bristol, in 1741. Mr. Foote’s life
and adventures are before the public in various forms.

Recently two natives of Truro have distinguished themselves throughout
Europe by a most important geographical discovery. The Mr. Landers, as
is well known, descended a large river from the interior of Africa to
the sea, at what is called the Bite of Benin, where the river loses
itself by flowing in divided streams through a delta created by the
deposit of alluvial debris, brought down from the highlands by the
force of its own current.

A monument is now constructing on an elevated piece of ground at the
southern extremity of the town, in memory of the brother, who has most
unfortunately lost his life in a second expedition, intended for the
establishment of a friendly and commercial intercourse with the
inhabitants of countries thus brought within our reach.

An anecdote seems worth preserving relative to an invention,
completely in anticipation of the use now made of steam for propelling
vessels in all parts of the world. The mere idea of using this
gigantic power instead of the human arm for moving boats and ships
through the water, must have occurred to thousands; the mode of
effecting the application is the real invention.

About sixty years ago Mr. Charles Warrick resided at Truro, a young
man of some family and fortune, and bred to the law; a person of
singular and eccentric habits, displaying much ability and genius in
some cases, with an apparent want of both in others. Mr. Warrick
partook of a taste very common in places situated on navigable rivers,
for spending a large portion of his time on the water, or in making
contrivances relative to navigation; and he constructed a boat with
slender ribs, covered either with canvass or with paper soaked in
substances that excluded water: on each side he appended a wheel
connected together by an axis turned in the middle into the form of a
staple, or what is called a double crank. In this boat he frequently
paddled from Truro to Falmouth Harbour, moving the crank with his
hands, and out-running all other boats; but no one thought of applying
the construction to larger vessels, nor had he, in all probability,
the slightest notion, that within half a century similar wheels and
cranks, moved by steam-engines, would impel vessels of many hundred
tons burden through the most tempestuous seas, and against winds and
tides, over extensive oceans, with a safety and a precision almost
equal to land conveyance.

As illustrative of the changes in all respects, that have taken place
in the last three-quarters of a century, the following curious
relation, although trifling in itself, may be allowed to find a place.

A family about to embark at Falmouth, no longer ago than the year 1748
or 1749, hired a coach and horses in London to convey them there,
a system of travelling practised on the continent up to the present
time; the driver having delivered his charge, made known his desire
for obtaining, what he perhaps denominated a back-freight, on easy
terms, and a party of young men availed themselves of the opportunity,
stipulating, however, that in the event of their reaching a town at
any part of the day where cockfighting would take place in the
evening, the coach should lie by to afford them an opportunity of
being present at the diversion.

Truro has not been measured as a distinct parish, and is therefore
included in Kenwyn.

  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6958   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1119   4    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   2358   |   2482   |   2712   |   2925.
    giving an increase of 24 per cent. in 30 years.

It must be observed, that the amount of Real Property, the Poor Rate,
and the Population, relate only to the ward rather than the parish of
St. Mary, constituting Old Truro. In a note attached to the last
Population Abstracts, it is said that the whole town is supposed to
have contained 8,468 inhabitants in the year 1831.

The present Rector of Truro is the Rev. E. Dix, who was presented by
the Earl of Mount Edgcumbe in 1833. The net value of the living, as
returned in 1831, was 135_l._


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The town of Truro stands on the same kind of argillaceous slate that
prevails in the adjoining parishes of Kenwyn and St. Clement’s.


     [6] Brady on Boroughs, p. 42.

     [7] Brady, p. 43.

     [8] Brady, p. 43, from Dugd. Bar fol. 610.

     [9] Brady, ibid.

     [10] Brady, p. 44.

     [11] Brady, p. 44.

     [12] Ibid.




ST. TUDY.


HALS.

St. Tudy, alias St. Tidy or Tudy, is situate in the hundred of Trigg,
and hath upon the north Michaelstow, east Brewar, south St. Mabyn,
west St. Kew. For those names, they are all synonymous, and signify
St. Udye, or St. Udith, (or the Holy Udith,) referring to the name of
St. Udith, the tutelar guardian and patroness of this church, and by
the name of Mama Tedy or Tidy,[13] i. e. Mother Udith, it was taxed in
the Domesday Book 1087, which plainly shows here was an endowed
rectory church dedicated to her before that time. In the Inquisition
of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, into the value of Cornish
Benefices, Ecclesia de St. Tudy, in decanatu de Minor Trigshire, was
valued 1294 for its revenues, c_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, £31;
the patronage in ――――; the incumbent Trelawny. This parish was rated
to the four shillings per pound Land Tax for one year, by the name of
St. Udy, £144.

The history of St. Udith is as followeth: she was the natural daughter
of King Edgar, by the lady Wolfchild, who was afterwards made Lady
Abbess or mother of the maids of the Nunnery of Wilton in Wiltshire,
wherein she demeaned herself so well as to her conduct, piety, and
purity, that, as Capgrave tells us, she obtained the reputation of a
saint, though the author of Polychronicon, Liber 6, chapter 9, tells
us, that Bishop Ethel wold sharply reproved her, for deviating from
her rule, and being too curious in her attire; to whom she replied
that God regarded the heart more than garments, and that sin might be
covered as well with rags as robes; to which the Bishop answered,
that, though our corrupt mortal bodies were covered with silk, silver,
and gold, it could neither procure a minute’s life or health for us,
nor hide our sins from God’s sight, but were rather an argument of our
pride and vanity, than sincerity or humility.

After the brother of St. Udith, Edward the Martyr, was slain, St.
Dunstan had a mind to make her Queen of England to defeat Etheldred
the lawful heir, but her piety or policy would not permit her to
accept the proffer: she died Anno Dom. 984, and was buried in the
church of Denis of her own building at Wilton. She is commonly called
Udith the younger, to distinguish her from St. Udith her aunt.

Hengar was formerly the seat of the Billings, alias Trelanders, whose
daughter and heir was married to John Trelawny of Coldrinick, esq. by
whom she had no issue; after his decease she was married to Dr. Lower,
Physician in Ordinary to King Charles the Second, by whom he had three
daughters, one married to Edward Morice of Werrington, esq. (by whom
she had no issue); after his decease she was married to the honourable
Major-General Charles Trelawny, governor of the Royal Citadel of
Plymouth, now in possession of this place. Another daughter was
married to Captain Mitchell; the third to ―――― Lower of St. Winnow.

Pen-vos, alias Pen-vose. It is now the dwelling of Humphrey Nicoll,
esq. Commissioner for the Peace, that married ―――― Cudworth.

In this parish as I take it, or St. Kew, is still to be seen the ruins
of a once famous and treble intrenchment of our ancestors the
Britains, called Dameliock Castle, and taxed by the name of Dimelihoc,
in the Domesday Book 1087, wherein Gothlois, (i. e. purple back or
spear,) Earl of Cornwall immured or fortified himself against Uter
Pendragon’s soldiers: in which place he was by them slain about the
fifth century, as our annalists tell us (see Dundagell).

Damelyock, alias Daimelack, as a monosyllable in British, Scotch, and
Irish, signifies the hazard, skirmish, or battle house or place. The
lands about this fort and castle, since its first erection, have been
enclosed and cultivated, so that now it is comparatively defaced, but
not so much as to obscure this treble ditch, camp, or intrenchment,
from the sight of spectators or observators, or to obliterate its
ancient name aforesaid; but query, whether this Dameliock Castle be
not in St. Kew and St. Teath?

Those Billings, alias Trelawders, mentioned on the other side, were
gentlemen of blood and arms of three or four descents, and at Hengar,
alias Hanger or St. Mabyn, married with the daughters of Blewet of
Colon (who gave for their arms, Gules, a chevron between three eagles
displayed Vert), Babb of Tingraze in Devon, Hockyn of Helland, and
Helston in Cornwall, and gave for their own arms, in a field Or, on a
bend Sable three stag’s or buck’s heads couped at the neck Or, attired
and armed of the Field. The which Billing, heir of St. Mabin, was
married to Hamley of Treblethick 1630.

Note further, that Tredinick of St. Breock gave the same arms as
Billing or Trelawder of Hengar, only differenced with the colour of
the stag’s or buck’s heads, viz. in a field Or, on a bend Sable, three
buck’s heads attired or armed Argent.


TONKIN.

St Tudy, in the hundred of Trigg, hath to the northwest St. Kew, to
the north that and St. Teath, to the east Michaelstow and Brewer, to
the south St. Mabin.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. this church by the name of St Tudy, was
valued (Tax. Ben.) at c_s._ having never been appropriated.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book very high, £31;
the patronage in Christ Church College, Oxford; the present incumbent
Mr. George Allanson (vicar likewise of Budock and Gluvias) who
succeeded ―――― Collier.

The manor of Tinten, id est [as the name appears below to be Tynton,
Din Don, Tin Ton, the hill house. W.]

In the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edward I. (Carew, fol. 47 b.) this
is valued in twelve.

This was anciently the seat of the family of the same name. Johannes
de Tynten is named among the knights of the county of Cornwall, 17
Edward II. when John de Treiagu was Sheriff (Ibid. fol. 51). Johannes
de Tynton (probably his father, for this was no knight) was one of
those that had £20 per annum of land or rent or more, in the county of
Cornwall, 25 Edward I. John de Tinten held one fee Mort. [of the
honour of Morton] in Tynten, and in Trewinneck, 3 Henry IV. (ibid fol.
42 b.)


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish is adorned with several splendid monuments,
one to Mr. Anthony Nicoll, who distinguished himself in the Civil War,
and another representing a mother and three daughters kneeling, with
various arms emblazoned over them, Reskymer, Courtenay, Mohun,
Trelawny, &c.

St. Editha, the patroness of this church, as Mr. Hals conjectures on
the assumed authority of Domesday Book, must have acquired a high
degree of sanctity at a very early period of life, having died in her
twenty-fourth year, after passing her time from childhood in the
convent at Wilton, of which her mother was abbess; and, therefore, as
it is observed in the Roman Martyrology, “She may be said rather not
to have known the world than to have left it;” but she fasted, wore
hair-cloth next her skin, and chose to perform every office that was
most disgusting or loathsome. In recompense, her beatitude was
attested, according to William of Malmesbury, in a most decisive
manner; who says, that while Canute celebrated the festival of
Whitsuntide at Wilton, he spoke with ridicule of St. Editha, adding,
that he never could believe the daughter of King Edgar could be a
saint, who had always addicted himself to acts of tyranny, and to the
indulgence of bad passions. Ethelnodus, the archbishop, then present,
contradicted the king, and proceeded to open the tomb of the virgin
saint; when, raising herself up so as to sit, she seemed to attack the
contumaceous king; and he, terrified, fell prostrate on the ground,
apparently without life; but recovering, he expressed great joy, that
by a renovation of his existence he found himself in a situation to be
penitent for his fault.

The presentation to this rectory is in the Dean and Canons of Christ
Church. The Rev. Charles Hodgson, late student, presented in 1817, is
the present incumbent.

The whole parish appears to be well cultivated, notwithstanding that
it adjoins the granite district of St. Breward or Simonward, and it is
agreeably diversified by hill and dale.

It appears from Mr. Lysons that the manor of St. Tudy belonged to the
family of Nicoll, but that it was sold together with Penrose, the
family seat, to Mr. Trehawke of Leskeard, by whom they have been
devised to Samuel Kekewich, esq.

The manor of Tinten, like so many others, either gave its name to the
ancient proprietors, or received it from them. An heiress took it to
the Carminows of Boconnoc. The Carminow property passed to the
Courtenays, and fell to the Crown on the attainder of the Marquis of
Exeter. This manor was included by King Henry the Eighth in the
exchange given for the honour of Wallingford.

The manor of Kellygreen belongs to Walter Raleigh Gilbert, esq.

Tremeer was a seat of the Lowers, the birth-place of Sir William
Lower, the author of various works.

  The Phœnix in her flames, a Tragedy.
  Polyenetes, or the Martyr, a Tragedy.
  Horatius, a Roman Tragedy.
  The Enchanted Lovers, a Pastoral.
  The Amorous Fantasme, Tragi-Comedy.
  Noble Ingratitude.
  Journal of the Travels of King Charles the Second in Holland; and
  others.

He died in 1662.

Here also was born Richard Lower, M.D. brother of the former, who
lived to the year 1690. This gentleman published various medical
works, and some papers in the Philosophical Transactions. One of his
works, “Tractatus de Corde, item Motu et Calore Sanguinis et Chyli in
eorum transitu,” reached a third edition in England, and was reprinted
abroad.

Hengar is a handsome seat, very pleasantly situated on a rising
ground, and at a small distance from the house a prospect is obtained
of great extent and beauty, in consequence of an admixture of all the
varieties of scenery which distinguish Cornwall――granite mountains,
undulating hills of the slate formation, deep valleys with streams of
water, and trees, and finally the sea. This place was the occasional
residence of Matthew Michell, esq. acquired under the will of Samuel
Michell, a Colonel in the Guards, who died there in 1786, after
attaining his eighty-fifth year. Mr. Matthew Michell has left this
place with all his property to his widow, who is again married to a
gentleman of the name of Searle.

  St. Tudy measures 2881 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as        £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4286   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           398   8    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    502   |    512   |   605    |   658
    giving an increase of 31 per cent. in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish no where reaches so far as the granite hills. Its eastern
part is composed of rocks which pass into the porphyritic series
of St. Breward; the western part rests on the same kind of rocks as
those of the adjoining parish of St. Teath.


     [13] No such name appears in the index to Domesday Book; nor should
we expect it. On the contrary, this place is probably the Tewardevi of
the Domesday survey. _Edit._




TYWARDRETH.


HALS.

Tywardreth is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath upon the
north Lanlivery and Luxillian, south the British Channel, east Giant
and Fowey Town, west St. Blazey. The name signifieth the house upon
the sand; and by the same name of Tywardrai, it was taxed in the
Domesday Book 1087. In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester into the value of Cornish Benefices 1294, Ecclesia de
Tywardreth, in decanatu de Powdre, was valued at cvi_s._ viii_d._; in
Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, £9. 6_s._ 8_d._; the patronage formerly in
the abbat of Tywardreth, now Rashleigh; the incumbent ―――― Woolridge;
the rectory in Rashleigh; and the parish rated to the four shillings
per pound Land Tax 1696, for one year £205. This church is wholly
appropriated or impropriated to the prior or abbat of Tywardreth,
before the statute of Richard II.; and the vicar was paid only with
£11 modus or stipend per annum, out of the Duchy Exchequer of
Lestwithiel. It was the chief alien priory in those parts, which name
of alien priors or abbats arose soon after the Norman Conquest, when
certain Englishmen, Normans, and French, gave lands in England to
Monasteries beyond the seas; upon which the monks built convenient
houses for increasing the number of those under their own rule,
and to inspect their revenues and tithes, in which houses they planted
a suitable number of monks, under a superior or steward. This priory
or abbey was therefore accordingly made subject to the Abbey of St.
Sergius and Bacchus of Angiers in France, soon after the Norman
Conquest (to whom also is dedicated their church of Luxillian).

The history of whom is as followeth: These saints were Christians and
Noblemen of the City of Constantinople; the one Primicerius, and the
other Secondicerius; that is to say, Sergius the First, and Bacchus
the Second, Secretaries of State to the Emperor Maximian; who for that
they would not join with him in sacrificing to the Roman gods or
idols, were cruelly tormented by the common hangman, and lastly had
their heads chopped off, 7th October 310. There is pious mention of
those saints in the Second Nicene Council, Martyrologers, and
otherwise; and many churches are dedicated to them in Constantinople,
and other parts of Christendom; and the place in Asia where St.
Sergius suffered, is called Sergiopolis to this day.

This abbey was first founded by William Earl of Morton and Cornwall,
according to the rule of Augustine and Benedict. It was afterwards
re-edified and greatly augmented in its revenues by Robert de
Cardinham, tempore Richard I. 1190, (see the Monasticon Anglicanum of
Dugdale); for which reason he is by some persons taken to be the
founder thereof.

This Robert de Cardinham I take to be the same person mentioned by the
name of Robert de Cardinam, (Survey Cornwall, page 44), who held by
the tenure of knight service seventy-one knight’s fees of Morton in
Cornwall, tempore Richard I.

This abbey or priory house and church of Tywardreth, was dedicated to
St. Andrew the Apostle and Martyr of Christ, whose history followeth.
He was born at Bethsaida in the province of Galilee, elder brother of
St. Peter, and disciple of St. John Baptist, and was present when
he pointed at Jesus, saying, “Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away
the sins of the world;” whereupon he left St. John Baptist and
followed Christ. Who, for that, after our Saviour’s Crucifixion, he
would not sacrifice to the Roman Gods or Idols, at the command of
Egeus Proconsul of Rome, sent governor into the province of Achaia,
was crucified as his Lord and Master was, 30 November, Anno Dom. 60,
in the reign of the Emperor Nero.

His body was afterwards translated to Constantinople, from thence to
Italy, and lastly to Amalphy in Naples, where it still remains.

       *     *     *     *     *

Now, by reason these alien priories transmitted to their superiors
beyond the seas the news and state of affairs in this land, whereby
the designs and undertakings of our princes were divulged to their
enemies in their French wars; therefore all those sort of religious
houses of this kind were suppressed by Act of Parliament, tempore
Edward III. Richard II. Henry V. and Henry VI.; and amongst them in
Cornwall, Minster, alias Tolcarne, in Trigmajor, and Minster in
Kerryer; St. Neot and St. Bennett’s in Lanyvet in Pider were put down,
and their lands confiscated to the Crown; but this priory of
Tywardreth, for its loyalty or integrity, or for some other reason of
security, stood firm till the general dissolution of all those
religious houses, 26 Henry VIII. when the revenues of this abbey,
according to Dugdale, was £123. 9_s._ 3_d._ Speed £151. 6_s._ 8_d._ as
is set down in their Monasticon Anglicanum.

Mena-belly, alias Mena-billy, in this parish, is the dwelling of
Jonathan Rashleigh, esq. Commissioner for the Peace and Taxes, and
some time Member of Parliament for Fowey, that married Carew of
Anthony, his father Sawle, his grandfather Bonython, his
great-grandfather Lanyon. Originally descended and denominated from
the local place of Rashleigh house, in or about Raneleigh parish in
Chulmleigh Hundred in Devon.

In this parish, towards the sea coast, is that famous camp or treble
intrenchment, called Castle Dore, consisting of a threefold trench
cast up of earth, in which heretofore our ancestors the Britons
fortified themselves against their enemies; out of which, as common
report saith, tempore Charles II. some dreamers of money hid in this
camp or place, upon search made, accordingly found such treasure as
they much enriched themselves thereby.


TONKIN.

Trewardreth is in the hundred of Powder; for the name, it signifies
the village or the house upon the sand. It is a vicarage, not valued
in the King’s Book, as having been but lately endowed; the late
incumbent was Mr. May, likewise Rector of St. Mewan, who died this
year (1732).

In the year 1291, 20th Edward I. the rectory of this church was valued
at £5. 6_s._ 8_d._ being appropriated to the priory here; and the
vicarage at 13_s._ 4_d._

In 3 Henry IV. William de Campo Arnulphi [or Champernoun] held here
one fee, from whom the prior held three acres and a half in the same.
There are what are still called the priory lands. But to go further
back, as Robert de Cardinam was the founder of this priory in the time
of Richard the First, according to Bishop Tanner in his Notitia
Monastica, this must be one of the seventy knight’s fees, which the
said Robert held in this county, 6th Richard I. who by consequence
must then have been lord of this manor. In Domesday Book it is, by the
name of Tiwardrai, numbered among the manors which William the
Conqueror gave to Robert Earl of Morton, when he made him Earl of
Cornwall.

Leland says of this place, Tywardreth, “A praty town, but no market,
lieth a quarter of a mile from the east side of the bay; there is a
parish church, and there was a priory of black monks, a cell sometime
to a house in Normandy. Some say Campernulphus was founder of this
priory; some say that Cardinham was founder. Arundell of Lanherne was
of late taken for the founder.

“I saw a tomb in the west part of the church of this priory, with this
inscription:

          Hæc est Tumba
       Roberti filii Wilhelmi.

  “This Robert Fitz William was a man of fair lands, tempore Edwardi
  tertii Regis Angliæ.”


THE EDITOR.

The parish church and tower bear on the exterior an appearance of
antiquity. Internally, much decoration was displayed, and especially
by a rood-loft which has been recently taken down. These alterations
of our ancient churches are justly lamented by all persons capable of
admiring the beauty and imposing splendour of Gothic architecture, but
they seem to have almost inevitably grown out of the change of purpose
to which churches are applied. Originally, the chancel, protected by
the rood loft and by a veiled entrance, was destined for the
astounding miracle of repeatedly transforming bread and wine into the
actual body and blood of Christ, while the outward or less sacred part
of the edifice, was used for processions and scenic exhibitions;
accompanied by dirges or by triumphant choruses, adapted either to the
death or to the resurrection of our Saviour. In modern times, on the
contrary, a room is required so constructed as to admit of whole
congregations joining with an individual in prayers, or of listening
to his instruction.

The monastery has so completely disappeared, that its precise locality
was not remembered; but a gentleman of the neighbourhood having taken
considerable pains to ascertain whatever could yet be discovered
about it, made the following communication to the Gentleman’s Magazine
in 1822.

     “The ancient priory of Tywardreth has long been so entirely
     levelled with the ground, that it is not very easy even to
     ascertain its site. Some time ago the present vicar obtained
     leave to dig the ground on its supposed site in search of stones
     for erecting a vicarage house. The place where he made an
     excavation for this purpose appears to have been the east end of
     the priory chapel; and as some measurements were taken at the
     time, and I have, with the permission of the landlord, opened the
     ground in several places, partly with the hope of ascertaining
     the form of the chapel, and partly of throwing some light on its
     architecture, the following particulars may not be unacceptable.

     “The chapel appears, so far as could be ascertained by
     measurement, to have been eighty feet long, by fifty-seven wide,
     with a semicircular end towards the east, strengthened by four
     buttresses of wrought Pentewan stone, two feet wide, and
     ornamented by four pilasters; within the shafts are a single
     half-column, fourteen inches in diameter. At each angle was a
     handsome piece of architecture, as it was described to me, of
     which pilasters, resembling those already described, formed a
     part, but with the base five inches wide, and the mouldings in
     proportion.

     “In the vicarage garden, adjoining the west end of the chapel, a
     fragment of a stone arch was found, with a fleur-de-lis elegantly
     carved in deep relief; the same devise appears on the church
     stile, and in a coat of arms in one of the windows of the church,
     and appears from Tanner to have been part of the arms of the
     priory. The wall of the chapel is the south wall of the
     churchyard.

     “The chapel was paved with beach pebbles, and was built partly of
     common clay slate raised on the spot; the wrought stones were of
     compact hard porphyry, from Pentewan Quarry in the parish of St.
     Austell, and hornblende from the cliff between Duporth and
     Charlestown in the same parish. All the carved work is executed
     with much skill and taste.”

Several charters granted to this monastery are preserved in Dugdale’s
Monasticon. The earliest is in the 19th year of Henry the Third, A. D.
1234, as follows:

     “Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliæ, Dominus Hiberniæ Dux Normandiæ
     et Aquitaniæ, et Comes Andegaviæ, omnibus Archiepiscopis, &c.
     salutem. Inspeximus cartam Roberti de Cardinam, in hæc verba:――

     “Robertus de Cardinam omnibus Sanctæ Matris Ecclesiæ filiis
     salutem. Sciatis me, pro Dei amore et animæ meæ salute,
     concessisse et præsenti carta mea confirmasse ecclesiæ sanctorum
     martyrum, Sergii et Bachi Andegavi, et ecclesiæ Sancti Andreæ de
     Tywordrait et Monachis ibidem Deo servientibus et servituris,
     omnes donationes et concessiones quas antecessores mei, seu
     quicunque fideles de feodo meo ipsis fecerint,” &c.

The seal of the convent is understood to have been a saltire, or St.
Andrew’s cross Or, between four fleurs-de-lis, which accounts for the
sculptures noticed above.

St. Andrew became the patron saint of Scotland, and popular throughout
the whole island, after an Abbat, said to have borne the name of
Regulus, had brought some of his relics to a place then called
Abernethy, but where a Monastery, a University, and a city, have since
arisen to commemorate the Apostle.

The priory of Tywardreth appears to have been suppressed with the
other alien houses, but afterwards to have been re-established as an
independent society, or made denizen according to the legal phrase,
having at the time of the general dissolution the Priory of Minster
attached to it as a cell, which had been originally dependent with
itself on the Abbey of St. Sergius and St. Bacchus at Angiers, the
former capital of Anjou, and now of the department of the Maine and
Loire.

A very curious correspondence between Thomas Cromwell, Vicar-General
and Vicegerent of the King’s Supremacy on the one part, and Thomas
Collyns the last Prior on the other, is said to exist among the
papers and documents preserved by the Arundells of Lanhearn, and of
Wardour Castle in Wiltshire.[14]

In one of the letters Cromwell is understood to have complimented the
Prior on the possession of every active virtue, especially as
displayed in the good government of his convent; he assures him that
the King is fully sensible of his merits; and in consideration of his
great age and faithful services, the King out of special grace and
favour would allow him not only to resign the painful office of
governing such a society, but would admit of his recommending a
successor.

Collyns’s answer is full of thanks to the Lord Vicegerent, and of
gratitude to the King, whose approbation he esteemed above all worldly
matters, and next to the conscious satisfaction of having discharged
faithfully his duties towards the Almighty in the station to which it
pleased God that, without any merits of his own, he should be
advanced. He offered his most humble and grateful thanks to the King
for the great favours profferred to him; but that, feeling his health
and strength sufficient for enabling him to continue the discharge of
duties which the King had approved, he owed it to his conscience not
to withdraw from them.

This brought a letter from Cromwell, declaring that the horrible
savour of his sins, his crimes, and his iniquities had ascended before
the Lord; and that, unless he immediately relinquished an office which
he had most grossly abused, an ecclesiastical commission would proceed
to inquire into his misdeeds, and to punish him accordingly. This
latter is understood to have produced either an immediate surrender of
the priory, or Collyns’s resignation preparatory to it. He was elected
in 1506, and died in 1539, as appears from his tombstone in the
chancel.

The site of this priory was granted in 1542 to Edward Seymour, then
Earl of Hertford, afterwards Duke of Somerset, and Protector. It
subsequently became the joint property of the St. Aubyns and the
Pendarveses of Roscrow. The late Lord Dunstanville inherited the
latter portion, and acquired the former by purchase.

It seems that a manor of Tywardreth, which in early times must have
been paramount over the others, passed from Ricardus Dapifer to the
Cardinhams. Mr. Lysons says it was sold towards the latter part of the
13th century, by Isolda de Cardinham to the Champernownes, for a
hundred pounds. From this family it passed to the Herles and
Bonvilles, and fell to the Crown on the attainder of the Duke of
Suffolk in 1554. It belonged to the family of Rashleigh, in the early
part of the subsequent century; with whom it still remains, including
the entire impropriation of the great and small tithes.

Menabilly has been the seat of that distinguished family for a period
of at least two hundred years. At the last visitation of the Heralds
in 1620, Jonathan Rashleigh of Fowey, who married Alice, daughter of
―――― Bonithan of Kertleowe, is said to be alive, having two sons. The
eldest John Rashleigh, aged 34, and Jonathan Rashleigh the second.
John Rashleigh, ancestor of these two brothers, in the fifth degree,
is stated to have been of Barnstaple.

Individuals of this family have represented Fowey during the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, Charles the First, Charles the Second, and King
William; and since the accession of King George the Second, up to very
recent times, scarcely a Parliament has been assembled that could not
count a Rashleigh among its members.

Mr. Jonathan Rashleigh was elected Member for Fowey in 1728, and
continued to represent that town in eight successive Parliaments, and
in the last with his eldest son.

This gentleman married Mary, daughter of Sir William Clayton of
Surrey, and died in 1764, leaving a very numerous family, all of whom
have been distinguished as persons of ability, of integrity, and of
honour, followers of the best advice said ever to have been given by a
parent.

  Αιεν αριστευειν, και ὑπειροχον εμμεναι αλλων,
  Μηδε γενος πατερων αισχυνεμεν.

Mr. Philip Rashleigh, the eldest brother, represented Fowey during a
length of time almost equal to that of his father. He greatly improved
the family seat, but especially distinguished Menabilly by placing
there the most extensive and magnificent collection of Cornish
minerals, enriched by others from every part of the known world, that
could any where be seen. And Mr. Rashleigh has given to the public, in
two thin quarto volumes, fifty-three coloured plates, with
descriptions of the most choice or rare specimens. The work is
entitled, “Specimens of British Minerals, selected from the Cabinet of
Philip Rashleigh, with general descriptions of each article,” printed
by Bulmer and Co. the first volume in 1797, and the second in 1802. At
the end of the second volume is added a Geological Plate, being a
section of the stream work at Porth in the parish of St. Blazey, about
a quarter of a mile from high water-mark, containing the position and
measurement of ten distinctly marked deposits, with subdivisions,
accompanied by descriptions of each; the whole extending to a depth of
44 feet: and what adds to the value of this section, the stream work
was destroyed by a very high tide about the period when the volume was
published.

In addition to this scientific collection, Mr. Rashleigh constructed a
grotto at some distance from the house, encrusted on the inside by
some common but splendid minerals, exhibiting also the position of
lodes, their heaves, their slides, &c. and this was liberally thrown
open to all persons applying for admission.

Mr. Rashleigh married very late in life, and dying without children,
left his ample estate to William, the eldest son of his next brother,
the Reverend Jonathan Rashleigh, Rector of Silverton in Devonshire.

Mr. William Rashleigh succeeded his uncle in the representation of
Fowey, but voluntarily retired from public life to enjoy domestic
happiness, with the esteem and regard of every one who has good
fortune to be numbered among his acquaintances.

Polkerris, a small harbour near Menabilly, as indeed is indicated by
the first syllable of the name, has been improved, perhaps as a matter
of fancy, by the Rashleigh family. Mr. Jonathan Rashleigh built a pier
capable of giving shelter to coasting vessels and boats; and his son
the late Mr. Philip Rashleigh continued a sean fishery for the benefit
of the neighbourhood.

Kilmarth, which formerly belonged to a family called Baker, is also
the property of Mr. Rashleigh; the house is placed on a very elevated
piece of ground near the road leading from St. Austell to Fowey.

Treveryan once belonged to a branch of the Courtenays: it passed by a
purchase to John Thomas, esq. by whom the house was built. Mr. Thomas
devised it to the Reverend John Thomas Thomson, who died at Penzance
in 1811; and the estate now belongs to his son Henry Thomson, esq.
resident at Lostwithiel, a magistrate, and late a captain in the
Cornwall militia.

  Tywardreth measures 2967 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1813           4539   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           735  15    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    727   |    741   |   1238   |   2288
    giving an increase of nearly 215 per cent. in 30 years.

This great increase in the number of inhabitants is occasioned by that
parish and the neighbourhood becoming a mining district.

Present Vicar, the Rev. Thomas Pearce, presented by W. Rashleigh, esq.
in 1820. The net value of the living, as returned in 1831, was 135_l._


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The extreme northern part of this parish, in an angular form, extends
upon the granite, surrounded on all sides by the granite of Lanlivery.
The remaining parts of the parish are composed of schistose rocks,
which next the granite are of the porphyritic series, but become of a
doubtful nature in the southern extremity; these latter belong perhaps
to the calcareous series, as do also some of the rocks in the
adjoining parish of Fowey. The felspathic rocks next the granite, like
those of St. Austell, are metalliferous, as is proved by the important
mines of Lanescot and Fowey Consols.


     [14] A list of the Priors of Tywardreth, and extracts from a
     Calendar of the Priory, now in the possession of Lord
     Arundell, have been recently published in vol. III. of
     “Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica,” 1835.




ST. VEEP.


HALS.

St. Veep is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the north
St. Wenow, east Lanreth, south Lanteglos, west Fowey river or haven.
It was the church of the Abbat or Prior of St. Carock’s monastery in
this parish, for whom William Earl of Morton built and first endowed
it.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Lanreth. In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln
and Winchester 1294, Ecclesia de Wepe or Weep, in decanatu de West,
was rated c_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, £5. 0_s._ 6_d._ by the
name of St. Wepe. The patronage formerly in the prior of St. Carock,
now in Wrey; the incumbent ―――― Tyncomb; the rectory in possession of
―――― Wrey; and the parish rated to the four shillings per pound
Land Tax 1696, for one year, £229.

In this parish is the priory called Carock St. Pill, in which place
William Earl of Morton and Cornwall founded and endowed an house of
Cluniac monks, and dedicated the same to St. Sergius.

In this cell of St. Syriac lived that celebrated author Walter de
Exeter, a Benedictine Monk 1292, as Isaack in his Memorials of Exeter
calls him, with greater probability than that he was a Dominican
friar, as Bale saith, or a Franciscan friar as Mr. Carew tells us
(Survey of Cornwall, page 59); who, at the request of Baldwin of
Exeter, writ the life of Guy Earl of Warwick, who was the son of
Syward Baron of Wallingford, and married Felicia, daughter and heir of
Rohand Earl of Warwick; which Guy, at the request of King Athelstan,
fought a combat with Colbrand the Danish giant, and slew him, since
which time his valour and conduct hath been very famous.

And Walter of Exeter for this book, and his skill in other histories,
hath by Bale given him this character:――“In historiarum cognitione non
fuit ultimus,” that he was none of the meanest historians of his time;
though Mr. Carew saith he only deformed the history of Guy of Warwick.

The house and chapel aforesaid, except the windows, is now quite
dilapidated, the burying place made a garden, and a new dwelling house
erected near it with the stones thereof on its barton lands, now
pertaining to the heirs of Carter and Sillye. The fee-farm rent of £5
per annum is paid to the king or prince, and is exempted from payment
of tithes.

In this parish at Botowne, i. e. cow town, is the dwelling of ――――
Hawke, gentleman.


TONKIN.

St. Veep, in the hundred of West, is bounded to the west by the river
Fowey, to the north by St. Winnow, to the east by Lanreath, to the
south by Lanteglos.

This is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book, £5; the patronage in
Sir Bourchier Wrey, Bart.

In anno 1201, 20 Edw. I. the rectory of this church was valued (Tax.
Ben.) at c_s._ being appropriated to the Priory of Montacute in
Somerset; but “vicar ejusdem taxatur nihil propter paupertatem.”

The chief, or at least one of the most noted estates in this parish, is


THE MANOR OF MANELY OR MENELY.

This, in the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edw. I. is valued in twelve.
(Carew, fol. 49.) In 3 Henry IV. Matilda de Hewish held half of a
small fee of Mort. [Morton honour] in Manely. (Ibid. fol. 42.)


THE EDITOR.

The church of this parish is situated on an elevated ridge of land,
and is therefore conspicuous to a considerable distance. It contains
several monuments, and in the churchyard is a memorial of Nicholas
Courtenay, one of the family to whom lands in this parish, parcel of
Montacute priory, were granted by King Henry the Eighth.

There are two places in St. Veep especially deserving of attention.
One the site of an ancient monastery constituted on the smallest
scale.

Tanner has given a list of the various names by which this little
priory appears to have been called in early times. St. Syriac, St.
Ciriac, St. Carricius, St. Kerrocus, St. Cyret, and St. Julette. It
was a small cell of two monks only, dependent on Montacute; and being
mentioned by Gervase of Canterbury, it is known to have existed at the
least so early as the time of King Richard the First.

The church of St. Currie, or Karentocus, was given to the monks of
Montacute by their founder.

This cell occurs but once in Pope Nicholas’s Taxation.

Prior de Sancto Karabo (or by a various reading S^{to}. Karoko) habet de
redditu in decanatu de Westweleschire, et Major Tregeschire, £2.

In the valuation returned to King Henry the Eighth, and preserved in
the Augmentation Office, this small establishment is said to possess a
revenue of £11. 1_s._

It appears to have been valued as a separate house from the parent
establishment, although the return states, Cella Sancti Kaboci in
comitatu prædicto, dicto Prioratui de Monte Acuto appertinens, unde
Laurencius Castelton est Prior, est dative et removabile dicti Prioris
de Monte Acuto.

The site was granted in the 37th of Henry VIII. as parcel of the
possessions of Montacute, to Laurence Courtenay.

St. Cyric’s Creek, by which this house stood, is said to have derived
its name from a saint so called, who was buried there, perhaps in the
very place where the small monastery stood. The place has long since
acquired the appellation of St. Cadix; it belongs to the coheiresses
of the family of Wymond.

It is certainly a curious circumstance, that a work which engaged the
attention and even the admiration of England for a long period of
years, should have emanated in any way from a remote cell, consisting
of two monks. Mr. Carew assigns 1292 for the date of this work; but
Mr. Warton says, in his History of English Poetry, that a life of Guy
Earl of Warwick was written by Giraldus Cambrensis, who died about the
year 1220; but the history of our renowned champion has been composed
in Norman French, and in old English, both in prose and in verse;
moreover, the first part of the romance describing the adventures of a
_preux chevalier_ combating _à la outrance_ to recommend himself to
the favour of his lady love, is clearly by a different hand, and even
of another age from the second part, which represents him deserting
the idol of his affection; journeying to Palastine; and on his
arrival back to England, instead of repairing to Warwick Castle, the
abode and rich inheritance of his wife the Lady Felicia, retiring to a
cell, and taking alms at the castle gate, on the supposition that a
powerful and malignant demon, the creation of perverted imagination in
those times of ignorance, and blasphemously named after the Divinity,
might be propitiated by such disgusting observances, and by human
misery. The monk of St. Cyric may therefore have blended, enlarged,
abridged, versified, or rendered into prose the achievements of Sir
Guy, and his performance may have been peculiarly suited to the taste
of his age.

The second place to be noticed is Trevelyan, the original seat of the
very ancient and respected family that has resided for the last three
hundred years at Nettlecombe in Somersetshire, which they acquired by
a marriage with the heiress of Whalesborowe. The names of
Whalesborough and of Trevelyan occur among the Sheriffs of Cornwall in
the time of the Plantagenets, and also together as representatives of
the county; and the name of Trevelyan may be found in the same lists
for the county of Somerset. It is extraordinary that of this ancient
seat one half only belongs to the family. It would almost suggest the
suspicion of the other part being lost from want of attention, when
the intercourse between distant places was interrupted by difficulties
unknown to modern travellers. Few traces remain of the ancient
mansion.

Mr. Lysons notices several manors in this parish, with their descents
or sales, but without any thing that can make them interesting, except
perhaps the notice that a manor called Manely Coleshill formed a part
of the ample estate possessed by Lord Chief Justice Trevilyan.

Mr. Howell and Mr. Rashleigh are proprietors. The advowson of the
vicarage is divided, and in private patronage.

The Rev. Nicholas Every the present incumbent.

It is said that the cavalry commanded by King Charles the First
was stationed at St. Veep when the infantry of the opposite army
capitulated at Fowey. This station was probably selected for the
purpose of preventing a retreat to Plymouth; which however the cavalry
effected by passing the river some miles higher up, but not without
much blame attaching to many officers on the royalist side, and
especially to General Goring.

  St. Veep measures 2394 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           4087   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           477  17    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    506   |    511   |    585   |    697
    giving an increase of 38 per cent. in 30 years.

Net Value of the benefice in 1831, £215.

Since the above was written, Mr. Every, Vicar of this parish, and a
magistrate in the prime of life, is no more.――1836.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish belong to the calcareous series, and are
similar to those of Lanreath and Lanteglos.




VERYAN.


HALS.

Veryan is situate in the hundred of Powder, and hath upon the north
Tregony and Ruan Lanyhorne, east Caryhayes, west Philley, south the
British Channel.

Sure I am that in the Domesday Book 1087, this church or district
was taxed under the name and jurisdiction of Elerchy, situate
upon the lands of the Bishop of Bodman, now the Bishop of Exeter’s
manor of Elerchy; and by the same name it was taxed in the inquisition
of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, where we read Ecclesia
de Elerky in decanatu de Powdre £10. vicar’ ejusdem 40_s._; and in
Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, alias St. Verian as aforesaid, £19; the
patronage in the Bishop of Exeter; the incumbent ――――; the rectory
in possession of ――――; and the parish rated to the four shillings
per pound Land Tax 1696, for one year, £216. 9_s._ by the name of
Verian.

Note further, that Cæsar in his Commentaries mentions several places
in Gallia, called Elerci and Aulerci, from whence this word came into
Britain. Those were of four sorts, viz. Aulerci Eburorices, now Eureæ
in Normandy, Aulerci Diablentres, Aulerci Cenomanni, now Mans, and
Elerci Branovices.

In this parish is the dwelling by lease of Richard Trevanion, gent.
captain of a foot company in the militia, that married ―――― Maunder,
his father ――――, his grandfather Arundell, originally descended from
the Trevanions of Tregarthin and Caryhayes, and giveth the same arms
with them. His son Richard, that married ―――― Verman, was bred up in
the school of Mars, under King William III. in his wars, wherein he
accompanied him as captain of a foot company in all his Irish and
Flanders war; and lastly, was posted to the command of Pendenis Castle
in Cornwall, where he died. His son Nicholas was also bred up in the
marine regiments of King William III. and afterwards had the command
of the ――――, a third-rate man-of-war, and demeaned himself so well
therein, in point of valour and conduct, that after King William’s
death, he was knighted by Queen Anne, and is now one of the
commissioners at the dock of Plymouth for the Admiralty.

In this parish also at ――――, by lease, is the dwelling of John Robins,
esq. some time Commissioner for the Peace and Taxes, that married ――――
Thomas, his father ―――― Lawry, his grandfather ――――, and giveth for
his arms, of a supposed allusion to his name, Argent, a fess nebulé,
between three Robin Red-breasts Proper; whereas, robin in Cornish is
Robert in English, and roobron is red-breast.

In the Domesday Book are taxed also the vokelands of two other manors,
which I take it are now dismembered and situate in this parish, viz.
Treviles, or Trefilies, and Govile.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Veryan is in the hundred of Powder, and is bounded to the west by St.
Just, [by Gerrans,] by Philleigh, by Ruan Lanyhorne, and by St. Cuby,
[by Ruan Lanyhorne and the Fal,] to the east by St. Ewe and St.
Michael Carhays, to the south by Gerrans and the sea [rather by the
sea only, Gerrans being only west and south-west].

The name of this parish is a corruption, or rather abbreviation of St.
Symphorian, of which name there are two; one, saith Mr. Willis (Not.
Parl. vol. II. page 119), “born (as the Legenda Aurea tells us) in
Augustinum, the head city of Burgundy, where he suffered martyrdom on
the 22d of August, about the year 270.” The other [Mr. Willis’s own
words are these, “though besides this person, I find mention made of
another St. Simphorian, in Leland’s Collectanea, vol. I. a martyr,
buried with St. Wolfran a Bishop at Grantham, to whose memory that
church is dedicated. This St. Wulfran’s festival [was] celebrated the
15th of October.” (Note, that in many fines, records, &c. this parish
is called Sancta Symphrogia, or Simphrosia, who was wife to Getulius,
a rich citizen of Rome, and suffered martyrdom with him and seven of
her sons at Rome, A. D. 136, under Adrian. See Le Seur, Hist. de
l’Eglise et l’Empire, vol. I. page 516).

This church is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book, £19; the
patronage in the Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent Mr.
Fincher; the sheaf in Mr. Richard Kempe of Tregony, by lease [from Mr.
Weston, who had a lease transmitted, I believe, from his father,
Bishop Weston]; who resigning in 1734, was succeeded by Mr. Question.

But the antient name of this parish was Elerky, and so it is still
called in the King’s Book, as it is too in Taxatio Benefic. 20 Edw. I.
“Ecclesia de Elerky 10 lib. vicar’ ejusdem, xl. solid.” from the great


MANOR OF ELERKY.

In Domesday Book it is called Elerchi, which signifies the swan’s
house or swannery; for Elerk in Cornish is a swan, and there are the
remains of a large pool under the house, which seems to have been
designed to that end.

It is in the said book inserted among the manors given by William the
Conqueror, to his half-brother Robert Earl of Morton and Cornwall.

Francis Tregian, esq. among the rest of his estates, forfeited his
half of this manor.


WHITAKER.

The original name of this parish was the same with the name of the
manor Elerchi, or Elerky; that the appellation of the manor in
Domesday Book, this in the present time, and both derived from the
manerial house. This house stood upon a rising ground, nearly opposite
to the church, and on the west of it, which is now covered with
several houses of a mean condition, and yet marked as something
considerable to the eye, by a grove of tall trees upon it. The great
house, which the ancestors of these trees shaded, has been long down,
I suppose; and the mean houses on the ground have been constructed of
the poorest remains of it. It was bounded on the south by the lane
leading down to its own mills, still called Elerky Mills, and
distinctively noted as higher and lower; and on the east and north by
its lively brook, without a name, that divides the glebe from the
manor, then environs the house, and finally runs to the two mills
below. The manor is accordingly noticed so late as the 5th of Charles
the First, to have two mills within it. These mills even now proclaim
their original relation to each other, by the restrictions which the
higher is under to the lower, in not being able to keep up the water
from the other, beyond a certain space of time. And the house thus
environed by the brook could not have been very small, as it was the
mansion of a district, which in the 12th of Edward the First was
reckoned at forty-two acres, when so many are valued in much less, and
when so few are valued in more; but whence is the original name of
this house derived? Mr. Tonkin derives it from Elerk (C.) a swan, and
makes Elerky to signify the swannery, adding, that “there are the
remains of a large pool under the house, which seems to have been
designed to that end.” In all that part of antiquarian researches
where the eye is to be assisted by the imagination, and the past to be
collected from the broken appearances of the present; every active and
lively mind is apt to cry out against the creative fancies of the
antiquarian poet, and to exclaim in the language of Shakspeare,

  ――――As imagination bodies forth
  The form of things unseen, the Poet’s pen
  Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing
  A local habitation and a name.

But this spirit of exclamation should be checked. What depends in any
degree upon imagination, may by minds without imagination be easily
turned into ridicule. What is only to be inferred by slow and painful
collation of circumstances, will be ridiculed at once by those who are
too brisk to be slow, and too lively to take pains. And the very
ingeniousness of antiquaries themselves, will at times be a snare to
them also, by inducing them to cut short the labour of investigation,
to ridicule the dull laboriousness of conjecturing industry, and to
leap over the difficulty which it will not take the trouble to remove.
On the whole, therefore, I think Mr. Tonkin’s etymology of Elerky to
be the only one which is easy and natural, and his reference to
“remains of a large pool under the house,” to be sufficiently
grounded. There has evidently been something of the kind there. A
little dam below would easily make one now. The remains were probably
more in Mr. Tonkin’s time than they now are. And these corroborating,
and corroborated by the positive import of Eala, (I.) Alarch (W.) and
Elerk, Elerchy (C.) a swan, and the undoubted signification of the
latter when thus combined Elerch Chy (C.) for a swan’s house, compel
us to adopt the etymon.

But this name has been entirely superseded in popular use by the name
of the saint. So much was the spiritual patron of a church considered
and talked of, that his name was used to the total neglect of the
other. But who was the saint of this church? Symphorian, says Mr.
Tonkin; and Mr. Tonkin is right. It seems odd indeed to suppose such a
corruption of a name as this; Symphorian changed into Veryan. But we
see in Leland, (Itin. ii, 112), that the parish of Trevenny at
Tintagel in this county, “is of S. Symphorian, ther caullid
Simiferian.” This is exactly in point. Symphorian was called in this
parish, as well as in Trevenny, Simiforian or Simiferian, in order to
accommodate it more to our liquified pronunciation. It would then be
sure to be abridged soon, for the more rapid pronunciation of it, by
leaving out the first half of the name, and taking only the last, just
as Elizabeth is popularly abbreviated into Bet. The name would thus be
Phorian, Ferian, Voryan, or Verian; as we have an estate in the parish
before, denominated Tre-Veryan, and as the ordinary appellation of the
parish is St. Veryan in a record above, and in common conversation
Veryan. And the time of observing the parish feast coincides with all,
and confirms it; Symphorian, of Autun in Burgundy, having suffered
martyrdom the 22d of August; and the feast in honour of his martyrdom
being observed accordingly. Eight years ago the feast was agreed, for
the sake of the harvest, to be postponed one month; as, upon the same
principle, the memory of the parishioners says, it had been previously
postponed one fortnight. It is now kept on the first Sunday in
October, was previously kept on the first in September, and originally
on the third Sunday in August.

Nor can the name of St. Symphrogia, or Simprosia, which is said to
occur as the title of the parish “in many fines, records, &c.” be any
thing else than a corruption of St. Symphorian. And as a full
evidence, I find the picture of St. Veryan and his wife were within
memory to be seen in the eastern window of the church.

The square tower of Veryan church appears from its position on the
side of the church, and at the south-western end of the chancel, to
have been an addition to the church. After the lord had deserted
Elerkey for Ruan, the lord’s chapel was lengthened out into a belfry,
with a tower over it. The architecture of this tower seems to a
passing eye different from that of the church itself. And within, I
doubt not, evident traces will appear on examination, of the
posteriority of the tower to the church.


THE EDITOR.

There is very little to add respecting Veryan. Mr. Lysons states that
the manor of Elerkey, which gave its secular name to the parish, now
lost in that of the patron saint, belonged with Ruan Lanihorne to the
family of Archdeknes, from them it passed to the Lucys and Vaux, &c.
and that it was finally purchased by the late Mr. Francis Gregor in
1790.

The Dean and Chapter of Exeter have the great tithes, and they are
patrons of the vicarage; and, what is perhaps without example in
reference to so fluctuating a body, three successive vicars have stood
in near relationship to each other. The Reverend Mr. Mills was
succeeded by his son-in-law the Rev. Jeremiah Trist, and Mr. Trist by
his son, the Rev. S. P. J. Trist, who was instituted in 1829. The net
income of the benefice in 1831 was £339.

In the charter of William Earl of Morton, founding his priory of
Montacute, among the endowments is the following: “Et in Cornubia
Ecclesiam de Lerky,” which cannot be any other than Veryan, by its
original name.

       *     *     *     *     *

The late Mr. Trist built a very excellent house on his own land
adjoining to the glebe.

  Veryan measures 4864 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           6625   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          1255  12    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   1007   |   1082   |   1421   |  1525
    giving an increase of 51½ per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This extensive and interesting parish is entirely situated within the
boundaries of the calcareous series. The prevailing rock is a blue
argillaceous slate, the surface of which, when perfect, is either
glossy and irridescent, or finely striated: it alternates with several
kinds of massive or coarsely lamellar rocks, into which it gradually
passes. These rocks present the following varieties: a fine grained
rock abounding in scales of mica; a variety of greenstone or cornean
quartz rocks; and dark-coloured limestone.

This suite of rocks offers many objects worthy of a minute inquiry,
far beyond the limits of these short notices.


THE EDITOR.

A very excellent account is given of the Veryan limestone by S. J.
Trist, esq. in the first volume of the Transactions of the Geological
Society of Cornwall.

Mr. Trist says,

     The limestone occurs on the coast at Pendower Beach, and may
     thence be traced for a mile and a half inland.

     It comes to the surface, in three different places, nearly
     equidistant from each other, but at different elevations,
     the most inland being probably a hundred and twenty, or
     thirty feet above the level of the sea. In each instance it
     creeps out at the brow of a hill, and no where appears in
     the vale below, where it would seem originally to have
     stretched across the valleys, but to have been subsequently
     carried away, together with the accompanying matter, by
     diluvian action.

     In breadth it extends over a superficies of 350 yards, but
     alternates with an argillaceous schist, the lime itself
     never exceeding three feet in thickness, and that only in
     the upper beds of the strata. The lime scarcely amounts
     altogether to one eighth of the whole mass.

     According to an analysis made by the Rev. William Gregor, a
     good specimen of this stone consists of about nine parts in
     ten of carbonate of lime.

Mr. Trist then gives a comparative statement of the results from
calcining this limestone, and the well-known limestone of Plymouth,
that 200 Winchester bushels of lime from the kiln, provincially called
shells or foreright lime, are produced from 11 tons of the Veryan
limestone, by the consumption of 46 Winchester bushels of culm, more
universally known as Welsh stone coal; but that 14½ tons are required
of the Plymouth limestone to give the same quantity of lime from the
kiln, with the consumption of 56 bushels of culm, which would make the
Plymouth limestone inferior to that of Veryan, in about 32 per cent.
as to quality, and about 22 per cent. more in regard to fuel. As a
cement, its quality is remarkably good. Small spherical masses of
oxide of iron occur in great abundance; they are, in the opinion of
Mr. Gregor, pyrites in a state of decomposition, the sulphur having
escaped.

The colour of the rock is blue, and it is frequently traversed by
veins of calcareous spar.

In the schist which immediately reposes on the limestone, mica appears
in considerable abundance, and the whole is strongly impregnated with
lime. It is of a soft crumbling nature, decomposing on exposure to the
atmosphere, and in that state it is much esteemed as a manure.

The floor on which the lime rests (probably the whole alternating
formation) is an argillaceous schist, with veins of manganese, which
have been partially wrought.

       *     *     *     *     *

Mr. Greenough has laid down on his map a broad line extending about E.
N. E. from Gerrans and Veryan, crossing St. Blasey Bay and ending near
Looe, with the inscription, “calcareous matter along this line”.




WARBSTOW.


HALS.

Warbstow vicarage is in the hundred of Lesnewith, and hath upon the
north Jacobstow, east Tremayne, south Trenegles, west Davidstow.

In the Domesday Book this district was taxed under the name and
jurisdiction of Treveliad, now Trevelian.

This church was not endowed at the time of the first inquisition of
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester, 1294, and therefore not named
therein. It now goes in consolidation and presentation with Trenegles,
and is also taxed together with it. The patronage in the Duke of
Cornwall; the incumbent Wood; the rectory in possession of ――――.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Warbstow, in the hundred of Lesnewith, hath to the west Otterham, to
the north Jacobstow, to the east part of Devonshire and Tremain, to
the south Davidstow and Trenegles.

The true name of this parish is St. Warbury-stow, St. Warbury’s Place,
from St. Warbury alias Warburg. She was the daughter of Wolpher King
of Mercia, son to the famous Penda. The church celebrates her memory
the 21st of June, a holy virgin, to whom Leofrick dedicated a church
in Chester, which Hugh Lupus, the first earl of Chester of the Norman
blood, repaired and granted to the monks, and it is now the cathedral
there. [N. B. a Saxon Saint in Cornwall, introduced by the Saxons on
their early settlement on this eastern and detached part of Cornwall.]
This [church] is now attached to Treneglos, and passes in the same
presentation; the present incumbent being Mr. Charles Porter.

In this parish is a noble fortification, which perhaps might give
occasion of dedicating it to such a Saint as carried it with it such a
warlike sound [or, as the fact assuredly is, the fortification was
called Warborough, and the parish from it, Warborough-stow or
Warbstow. W.] I measured, and took a more particular view of it than I
had formerly done, this present year 1731.


THE EDITOR.

This part of Cornwall abounds in military antiquities, but it has been
far less carefully examined than other districts of the county;
judging from the present aspect of the country, one is induced to
wonder that camps or fortresses should ever have been established
there, or that stationary armies could by possibility have received
support.

The Editor recollects having seen the entrenchment many years ago;
that it struck him as much resembling the Roman works in Dorsetshire;
and as being of dimensions far more extensive than those of the usual
earthworks in Cornwall.

St. Walburge, the patroness of this parish, was the daughter of St.
Richard, a King of the West Saxons, who is said to have died at Lucca
in the year 722, on his way as a pilgrim to Rome.

His daughter having become a nun in the monastery at Wimbourn Minster,
was permitted by the Abbess Testa to depart with several other females
who had taken the vows, for the purpose of assisting her relation St.
Boniface in his conversion of the Germans, and in establishing the
angelic life among the women of this country.

Crediton in Devonshire had the honor of St. Boniface’s birth about the
year 680, and Exeter has to boast of his education under the pious
Abbat Wolphard. At about twenty-six years of age he undertook the
conversion of Germany, but was driven back by the war of Charles
Martel. He was, soon after his return, elected Abbat of Nutcell, a
place subsequently destroyed by the Danes, and never restored; he left
this high situation, however, and, fortified by the Pope’s blessing
and encouragement, he went a second time into Germany, where he
succeeded to so great a degree as to found the Archbishopric of Mentz;
to receive a plenitude of power with the gift of a pall from Rome, so
as to establish Bishoprics at his discretion; and with an alteration
of his name, which from an unfortunate association in the English
language, seems to us very contrary to what was intended. The original
name of the primate, the apostle of Germany, was Winfrid, but that
sounding neither sufficiently soft nor harmonious in Teutonic ears,
Boniface was substituted in its place.

The saint is distinguished by an invention perfectly singular within
the period of authentic history; he enriched the alphabet with an
additional letter, the (w) double u.

Having ascended to the pinnacle of terrestrial glory, he at last
obtained the crown of martyrdom through the medium of an ignorant mob
excited by the priests, whose craft he had destroyed.

Little is recorded of St. Walburga except the general piety of her
life and the miracles performed by various minute subdivisions of her
relics, which sufficiently attested her beatitude. There is a church
dedicated to St. Walburga at Bristol.

The great tithes of this parish are in the Eliot family. The vicarage
is in the gift of the Crown, being annexed to Treneglos.

Mr. Lysons says, that the chief manor in this parish, called Fentrigan
or Ventrigan, belonged to the Priory of Tywardreth, and that it was
one of those given to the Duchy of Cornwall in exchange for the honour
of Wallingford. Another manor called Donneny or Downniney belonged to
Oto Colyn, who died possessed of it in 1466, and has since passed
through the families of Champernownes and Arscotts to that of
Molesworth.

  Warbstow measures 3557 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as         £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815           1727   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                           241  16    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {   330    |    323   |    439   |    481
    giving an increase of 45½ per cent in 30 years.


GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are similar to those of the adjacent
parishes of Otterham and Tremaine.





WARLEGGON.


HALS.

Warleggan or Warleggon rectory is situate in the hundred of West, and
hath upon the north Temple, east St. Neot, south St. Pineck, west
Cardinham.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this place was distinguished and taxed by
the name of Cabell-an, id est, the chapel, (ab-Capella-an, Cornish
Latin) or Neot’s-ton, and at-Cabillian, now Cabilla, i. e. the chapel
in this parish tempore Henry III. and Edward I. Petrus filius Ogeri
tenet quadraginta acras terræ per serjantiam in Cabillian, in com.
Cornub. per unam capam de gresenge, in adventum dicti Regis in
Cornubiam, i. e. a grey cape coat with a cape or capouch.

At the time of the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester into the value of Cornish Benefices 1294, Ecclesia de
Warliggan was rated xx_s._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, Warliggan was
valued 5_l._ 17_s._ 6_d._ The patronage is in Gregor, in right of his
manor of Warliggon; the incumbent Trigg; and the parish is rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax of one year, by the name of War-liggan,
55_l._ 4_s._

Tren-Gove, alias Tren-Goffe, in this parish, synonymous words
signifying a stout, strong, robust, or courageous smith, so called for
that some such mechanic person heretofore lived in this place, or was
lord thereof, gave name and original to an old family of gentlemen,
from thence surnamed de Trengoffe, according to Verstegan’s rhyme, by
me set down under Angove in Illogan parish:

  “From whence came Smith, let him be Lord or ’Squire,
   But from the smith that forgeth in the fire?”

One of whose posterity sold those lands to Tubb, in whose issue it
remained for several descents; till by them sold to Parker, whose son
or grandson sold the same to John Trengoff, alias Nance, Esq. now in
possession thereof, some time Commissioner for the Peace and Taxes; a
younger branch of those Trengoves or Trengoffs that sold this barton
to Tubb aforesaid, and were so transnominated from living at Nance in
Illogan, whereof they had a lease. This gentleman married Chester, his
father Heale; and giveth for his arms, Argent, a cross hammed (i. e.
couped) Sable.


TONKIN AND WHITAKER.

Worleggon, in the hundred of West, hath to the west Cardenham, to the
north Temple, to the east St. Neot’s, to the south Bradock.

As for the name, I take it to be an abbreviation of Warth-la-gan, the
higher place on the downs, or the higher downy place, which will agree
very well with the situation of this church and parish, which lies
high, and mostly coarse ground, though some of it be now much
improved. [War Le Gan, upon the down, forms a nearer etymon. W.]

This is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book £5. 18_s._ 6_d._ the
patronage in Francis Gregor, Esq.; the incumbent Mr. Daniel Bandry;
[who was succeeded by Mr. Samuel Gurney, of Tregoney. W.]

In an. 1291, 20 Edw. I. this church was valued (Tax. Benef.) at xx_s._
having never been appropriated.


THE MANOR OF WARLEGGON,

[Which gave name to the parish, and took it from its own house, being
built upon a down. W.]


THE EDITOR.

Mr. Lysons states, that the manor of Warleggon, carrying with it the
advowson of the rectory, has been long in the Gregor family. Another
manor of the same name, belonging to the Corytons, was purchased by
John Trengove, otherwise ―――― Nance, Esq. in the year 1680, from whom
it has descended to James Wyard Gooch, Esq. of Orford in Suffolk.

The manor of Carborro or Carburrow has been for a considerable time in
the family of Arscott Bickford, Esq. of Deansland in Devonshire.

The church and tower of this parish suffered most severely from
lightning so recently as in the year 1818, when on Saturday the 14th
of March, according to the accounts then published, the tower was
almost shivered to pieces, and a part falling on the church, nearly
destroyed the whole interior, as well as the roof.

The improvidence and carelessness of mankind, in respect to contingent
dangers, more especially when they are unconnected with individual
interest, is not in any instance more manifestly displayed than in
what regards precautions against the tremendous effects of lightning.
Tower after tower has been struck in the county of Cornwall, and
scarcely one is provided with a simple metallic rod, which would
obviate all danger; and, more astonishingly still, vessels of war,
with hundreds of persons on board, and merchant vessels, laden with
the richest cargoes, are allowed to proceed on voyages, exposed to the
danger of utter destruction from this cause, on account of a
reluctance to incur an expense almost imperceptible in the general
outfit, if no value were placed on human life. On this subject the
reader may be desired to consult the writings of William Snow Harris,
Esq. F.R.S. of Plymouth, one among the distinguished natural
philosophers of modern times.

  Warleggon measures 1807 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as    £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815      1,127   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                       175  16   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    166   |    228   |    296   |    274
    giving an increase of 60 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. D. Clements, instituted 1833; the net
    income of the living in 1831 was £125.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

This parish, like the adjoining and parallel parish of Cardinham,
commences in the northern part on granite, and in proceeding southward
gradually passes from rocks of the porphyritic series into those of
the calcareous series.




WEEK ST. MARY.


HALS.

Week St. Mary is situate in the hundred of Stratton, and hath upon the
north Marhamchurch, west Jacobstowe, south North Pendyrwyn, east
Tamerton.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1292,
Ecclesia de Wi-Wyke, in decanatu de Trigmajorshire, was valued cvi_s._
viii_d._

In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, by the name of Wike St. Mary, £17. The
patronage was formerly in ―――― that endowed it, now alternately in
Rashleigh and ――――; the incumbent ――――; and the parish rated to the
4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, for one year, by the name of Wike St.
Mary, £170. 11_s._ 6_d._ It is called Wike St. Mary (to distinguish it
from St. Mary Magdalen’s church at Lanceston), this being dedicated to
the Blessed Virgin Mary, as its tutelar guardian.

This Wike St. Mary was the birth-place of that famous minion of
fortune and example of charitable benevolence Thomasine Bonaventure.
Whether so called from her success in worldly affairs, or from her
ancestors, is altogether unknown to me; most certain it is she was
born of poor parents about the year 1450, tempore Henry VI. but not so
poor but that her father had a small flock of sheep that depastured on
the wastrell of Wike St. Mary downs or moor, whereof she was the
shepherdess, (see Carew, p. 282, Lord Dunstanville’s edition,) who on
a certain day in that place doing this office, it happened that there
passed by a London mercer or draper that traded in this country, who
was going to visit his customers in those parts, and gather up such
monies as there were due from them to him for such wares as he sold.
This gentleman, at first sight, observing the beauty of Thomasine,
desired to talk with her, and, after some discourse, found her
discreet answers suitable to the beauty of her face, much beyond her
rank and degree. Then inquiring into her circumstances, as to her
riches, and understanding that she was poor, and she likewise
inquiring into his wealth, and where he lived, which was as aforesaid;
whereupon he told her, if she would go to London and reside with him
as a servant, he doubted not but it would be very conducive to her
wealth and preferment.

Thomasine replied, that she was under the guardianship of her father
and mother, and that she could not accept his proposal without their
consent; but if they were made acquainted therewith, and approved
thereof, and he appeared to them to be such a person as he pretended,
she knew nothing to the contrary but that she might embrace his offer.

Whereupon this Londoner forthwith applied himself to her parents, and
gave verbal assurances, that if they would permit their daughter
Thomasine to go to London, and become a servant to him, she should not
only have good wages and be well used, but in case he happened to die
while she was with him, he would so effectually provide for her that
she should not have occasion to try the friendship of any other person
afterwards; and to strengthen those his proposals, he produced some of
his acquaintance and debtors in those parts, who satisfied her parents
as to his reputation and integrity for performance of what he
promised.

Upon which report Thomasine’s parents consented to his request, so
that soon after she was conveyed or carried up to London, and entered
as a servant in this gentleman’s house, when she demeaned herself very
well, to the good liking of himself and family; when it so happened
that in a few years after, this tradesman’s wife sickened of a mortal
distemper and died, and some time after Thomasine and her master were
solemnly married together as husband and wife, who then, according to
his promise, endowed her with a considerable jointure in case of her
survivorship; and about two years after, having no issue, he died; and
by his last will and testament further made her his sole executrix,
leaving her a rich widow whom he took a poor servant.

This dower, together with her youth and beauty, procured her to the
cognizance of divers well deserving men, who thereupon made addresses
of marriage to her, but none of them obtained her affection but only
Henry Gall, an eminent and wealthy Citizen of London, to whom, after
he had made another augmentation of jointure in case of her
survivorship, she was accordingly married, and lived in great amity
and reputation with him as a wife for some years, till in fine this
Mr. Gall sickened of a mortal distemper whereof he died, and left
Thomasine a richer widow than he found her, aged about thirty years.

After which the fame, virtue, wealth, and beauty of the said Thomasine
spread itself over the City of London, so that persons of the greatest
magnitude for wealth and dignity there courted her; and amongst the
rest it was the fortune of John Percivall, Esq. to prevail with her to
become his wife; after which it happened that he was chosen Carver at
the table of the feast of Sir John Collet, Knt. Lord Mayor of London,
the 2d of Henry VII. anno Dom. 1487, at which time, according to the
custom of that City, Sir John drank to him in a silver cup of wine, in
order to make him Sheriff thereof for the year ensuing (in conjunction
with Hugh Clopton, Esq.); whereupon he covered his head, and sat down
at the table with the Lord Mayor of London, and was accordingly one of
the Sheriffs thereof. Afterwards, in 14 Hen. VII. 1499, the said John
Percivall, was elected Lord Mayor of London, and knighted by that
King, at which time Thomas Bradberry and Stephen Jenings were Sheriffs
thereof.

By this gentleman our Thomasine had a third augmentation of jointure
and wealth, together with the title of Dame or Lady, which she lived
many years to enjoy after the death of Sir John Percivall, Knight.
After which, Dame Thomasine, having no child by either of her three
husbands, spent the remainder of her days, till about the year 1530,
when she died, in works of piety and charity; as repairing highways,
building bridges, endowing or providing funds for poor maids,
relieving prisoners, feeding and apparelling poor people, with her
treasure and riches; and especially in this parish of Wike St. Mary,
where she was born, she founded a chantry and free school to pray for
her soul, the souls of her father and mother, her husbands and
relatives. To this chantry and school she added a small library, with
a fair house for lodgings for the schoolmaster, and chanters or
singing men, and others, parts of which are yet extant; and endowed
the same with £20 lands for ever. In which place, during the latter
part of the reign of Henry VIII. many gentlemen’s sons, both in
Cornwall and Devon, had their education in the liberal arts and
sciences, under one Cholwell, a good linguist, as Mr. Carew saith.

But, alas! afterwards, in the Parliament of the fourth of November,
first of King Edward VI. 1550, all colleges, free chapels, chantries,
fraternities, and guilds, throughout this kingdom, being dissolved and
given to that King, this chantry and free school underwent with others
the common downfall, and its revenues vested in the Crown, from whence
it passed to ――――, now in possession thereof.

There are two fairs kept yearly in this parish on the 8th of September
and the 10th of December.


THE EDITOR.

The church is situated on an eminence, and is therefore conspicuous at
a considerable distance in all directions; it is large, and built in
the usual manner of western churches with three aisles of equal
height; but the tower is so lofty as to exceed in height (according to
report) any other in the county, even those at Probus and St. Mabyn.

The church town is large; and the inhabitants preserve a shadow of
former traditionary importance by electing an annual mayor, who used
at least to receive some voluntary obediences from his townspeople in
the settling of small differences between them.

The etymology of the prefix Week seems to be less obscure than most
other additions to proper names. Week is in Cornish literally, sweet,
an epithet frequently applied to female Saints.

  An alms, Sir Priset! the drooping pilgrim cries,
    For sweet St. Mary and your Order’s sake.

               _To St. Agnes._

  Then cast, sweet Saint! a circle round,
  And bless from fools this holy ground.

These lines are from modern compositions, but made in imitation of
others much older.

St. Mary Week is, therefore, sweet or beloved St. Mary; indeed Treweek
is known to mean sweet, beloved town or village. The Saxon wick is
never, I believe, lengthened into week.

Mr. Lysons says,

The church town is in all ancient records called the borough of Week
St. Mary, and the occupiers of certain fields are still called
burgageholders.

The ancient manor of Week St. Mary appears to have been merged in that
of Swannacot, which belonged to the late Lord Dunstanville by
inheritance from his great grandmother, heiress of the Heles.

The manor of East Orchard Mauvais was purchased from Mr. Dennis Rolle
by the late Sir John Call.

There is a place near the church town called Castle Hill, believed to
be the site of an ancient fortress.

The advowson of the rectory belongs to Sidney-Sussex College in
Cambridge, having been given to that Society in exchange for another
immediately connected with his residence by Lord Carteret, who
inherited the disposal of this preferment from the family of Grenville.

  Week St. Mary measures 5,167 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as      £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815        3,012  0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         367 11   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    566   |    612   |    782   |    769
    giving an increase of 36 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Walter Gee, presented by Sidney-Sussex
    college in 1821; net value of the living in 1831, £388.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are of the same nature as those of Poundstock
and Jacobstow.




WENDRON.


This parish has been already described under the name of Gwendron, in
the second volume.




ST. WENN.


HALS.

St. Wenn is situate in the hundred of Pider, and hath upon the north
St. Breock, east Withiell, south Roach, west St. Colomb Major; but
whether named from its tutelar guardian and patron, Sanctus Wina, or
Wena, the Bishop of Winchester, anno Dom. 660, translated to London
anno Dom. 666, who died 670; or from Anwena or Unwena, Bishop of
Dorchester, anno Dom. 786, I know not.

This place is that San Vene, or Wena, taxed in the Domesday Book, and
the only church or district in all that book in Cornwall to which was
added the pronoun Saint, of which I have spoken elsewhere. In the
Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester into the value of
Cornish Benefices, Ecclesia de Sanct. Wenne in decanatu de Pidre 1294,
was rated at vi_l._ xiii_s._ iiii_d._ Vicar’ ejusdem xiii_s._ iiii_d._
In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1521, £16. 6_s._ 8_d._ The patronage was
formerly in the Prior of Bodman, who endowed it; afterwards, when that
Priory was dissolved, in the Crown; from whence it passed to Prideaux
of Netherton, by him sold to Rashleigh, now in possession thereof. The
incumbent Bedford; the rectory in Rashleigh; and the parish rated to
the 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, for one year, £126. 4_s._

About the year 1663, the tower and bells of this parish church were
struck down with thunder and lightning, and broken to pieces in a
stormy night, and a great part of the roof of the church broken in.


     (Here is another deficiency in the manuscript.)


And in particular those lands to the Lord Botreaux, by whose heir it
passed in marriage to Hungerford, from Hungerford to Hastings, from
Hastings to Edgecomb, from Edgcomb to Parkinge, from Parkinge to
Vivian of Truan, from Vivian to Hals (the writer hereof), now in
possession thereof.

Of this family was Michael de Tregury, a man of great learning, made
first governor or professor of the University founded at Caen in
Normandy by King Henry V. He was afterwards by him made Archbishop of
Dublin, where, after twenty-two years’ residence, he died, 1471, and
lies buried in St. Patrick’s Church there, with this bold epitaph:

  Præsul Metropolis Michael hic Dublinensis
  Marmore tumbatus, pro me Christum flagitetis.

i. e. Michael, the Metropolitan Bishop of Dublin, lyes under this
marble tomb, for whome Christ shall earnestly intreate or desire.[15]

       *     *     *     *     *

Lan-cor-la, in this parish, was formerly parcel of the manor of
Ryalton, the Prior of Bodman’s lands, who endowed this church upon
part of the said manor’s lands, with a considerable glebe, at least
eighty statute acres of ground.

This little barton of Lancorla was anciently the voke lands of a
considerable manor, now all dismembered, held, by the Records of the
Exchequer and Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, page 46, by the tenure of
knight’s service.

It is now by lease in the possession and dwelling of the writer
hereof, from Sir Jonathan Trelawny, Bart. Sir John Seyntaubyn, Bart.
and Sir George Cary, of Clovelly, knight, as heirs to Jenkin of
Trekeninge, to whom it came by purchase from Botreauxes and Parkinge’s
heirs and assigns.

This manor of old contained fifteen Cornish acres of land, before
dismembered tempore Edward I. that is to say, 638 statute acres, and
was privileged with the jurisdiction of a Court Baron or Leet, and had
a steward or bailiff pertaining thereto as dependant on Ryalton
aforesaid.

Checkenock, now Killignock (S. T.) in this parish, was another
district taxed in the Domesday Book 1087, from whence was denominated
an old family of gentlemen surnamed de Killignock, where they
flourished in good fame for many generations, till the time of Henry
VIII. when the only daughter and heir of Thomas Killignock was married
to Richard Nanskevall, alias Typpet, of St. Colomb, which marriage
brought these lands into his possession, where for three or four
descents his posterity flourished in genteel degree, till the latter
end of the reign of King Charles II. when Matthew Typpet, Gent. that
married Ringwood, of Braddock, having encumbered his estate with much
debts, sold this place and the manor of Borlace Varth to Mr. Joseph
Hawkey, his attorney-at-law, to pay costs in defence of actions
brought against him by his creditors; and his other lands to Bligh,
Vivian, and Hals, the writer of these lines, and left his son and heir
a beggar. The arms of Typpet, ―――― three tippets, as I remember.

Tre-with-an, in this parish, i. e. the Tree Town, or Town of Trees,
tempore Henry IV. was the land of Stephen de Trewithan, who held in
this place and elsewhere, by the tenure of knight service, 25 Edward
III. £20 per annum in lands of Barkley’s manor of Tremore (Survey of
Cornwall, p. 52), from whose posterity, tempore Queen Mary, it passed
by sale to Renphry, whose son sold it, tempore James I. to Parkings,
whose great-grandson Francis Parkings is now in possession thereof.
The arms of Parkings are, in a field ―――― three pigeons ――――.

In this parish stands Damelsa Castle, a treble entrenchment of earth
on a high mounted bank or hill, on the south side of, and contiguous
with, Damelsa House and lands. Probably it was erected before the
Norman Conquest, to resist the incursions of the Danes, since those
three rampiers consist of rude stones and earth after the British
manner, as a hedge, not a wall. (See Castle an Dinas, in St. Colomb).
For after the Conquest aforesaid, castles in England were generally
built of lime and stones after the manner of the French. Probably it
was demolished tempore King Stephen or King Henry II. when, many
hundreds of those castles by their decree were pulled down in this
island, as our chronologers all tell us.

In this parish, at Treganatha, i. e. the Spinster’s Town or dwelling,
is held annually a fair or mart on St. Mark’s day, April 25, and
another on August 1.


TONKIN.

St. Wenn is in the hundred of Pider, and hath to the west St. Colomb
Major and St. Ennodor, to the north St. Breock, to the east Withiell,
to the south St. Roche. This parish takes its name from St. Wenna, its
female patroness.

This is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book £16. 6_s._ 8_d._ The
patronage in Philip Rashleigh, Esq. the incumbent Mr. John Bedford.

In an. 1291, 20 Edward I. the rectory here was valued (Tax. Ben.) at
vi_l._ xiii_s._ iiij_d._ being appropriated to the Abbey of Tewkesbury
in Gloucestershire; and the vicarage at xiii_s._ iiij_d._

The manor of Borlase, id est, the green summit or rising [as Bar Glas
or Las (C.)] This lordship was given by King William II. surnamed
Rufus, to ―――― Lord of the Castle of Palfer in Normandy, ever since
which his posterity have flourished here and at Treluddero, &c. in
great esteem, by the name of Borlace (V. Upton de re militari). [N. B.
This is a singular, perhaps a single, instance of a Norman or Saxon
family assuming a Cornish name. Indeed I suspect it not to be true;
and what is more certain, that species of apples which in Cornwall we
call a Borlase, and more commonly a Treluddera, pippin, appears
plainly to have taken its name from this family and that place, and
serves as a good opening for explaining all those other names of
apples which are merely Cornish in themselves like this. WHITAKER.]


THE EDITOR.

It seems that Great Skewish, in this parish, belonged to a family of
that name, one of whom was an author at a period so early as the reign
of Henry the Sixth, when he compiled an abridgment of the Chronicles
and the Wars of Troy; but in all probability the work has never been
printed, since it is not noticed by Warton; nor is the author’s name
to be found in the catalogues of our public libraries.

But the glory of this parish is Michael Tregury, Archbishop of Dublin.

Six or seven years ago, my attention having been drawn to this
individual, who may justly be considered an honour to Cornwall, I
applied to the Very Reverend J. R. Dawson, Dean of St. Patrick’s,
through his brother the Right Honourable George Robert Dawson, when
the Dean most kindly and liberally supplied me with a drawing of
Archbishop Tregury’s tomb, as it is restored by the celebrated Doctor
Swift, and furnished me with all the particulars known of my
distinguished countryman.

I procured a wood engraving to be made of the drawing, and sent it,
with whatever I could collect of Tregury, to the Gentleman’s Magazine,
a reprint of which will here be inserted:

[Illustration: SEPULCHRAL EFFIGY OF ARCHBISHOP TREGURY, IN THE
CATHEDRAL OF DUBLIN.]

     Mr. URBAN,                 _Tredrea, Cornwall, March 2, 1831._

     You will much gratify me, and, I may venture to add, many other
     correspondents, by inserting in your most excellent repository,
     which has now survived one century with a spirit and vigour that
     give promise for its continuing through another, some particulars
     of an individual sprung from this county, who must have been a
     man of talent and of learning sufficient for adding lustre to any
     origin; but who is now almost entirely forgotten, his family
     having long since become extinct, and the records of the
     University, of the Church, of the Diocese, and of the Province
     over which he presided, having in great measure perished in the
     devastations of the civil war, and especially of those aggravated
     by religious dissensions.

     Mr. Lysons, in his History of Cornwall, states, that in the
     parish of St. Wenn is situated Tregury, Tregurra, or Tregurtha,
     the seat of a family so called, of whom was Michael de Tregury,
     Archbishop of Dublin, who died in 1471. The last heir male of the
     elder branch of this family died in the reign of Henry the Fifth,
     leaving three daughters coheirs, who sold this barton to the
     family of Botreaux, from whom it passed successively, by
     inheritance or sale, through the families of Hungerford,
     Hastings, Edgcumbe, Parkins, and Vivian, to Mr. William Hals, who
     wrote the Parochial History of Cornwall, and resided here in the
     latter part of his life. The estate, now called Tregotha, is the
     property of Thomas Rawlings, Esq.

     This brief notice of the Archbishop scarcely made any impression
     on my mind beyond a mere recollection of the circumstance, when a
     Cornish gentleman informed me that he had observed a monument to
     this Prelate in the Cathedral at Dublin. I then took the liberty
     of applying, through Mr. Dawson, Member for the County of
     Londonderry, to his brother the Dean of St. Patrick’s, who not
     only gave me every information and reference that is known to
     exist, but also a drawing of the monument, of which I have sent a
     wood engraving.――Since this was engraved, I have seen a tracing
     tracing from an old drawing in the possession of Sir William
     Betham, Ulster King at Arms, which shows that the sides of the
     original altar-tomb were adorned with trefoil-headed arches
     rising from short pillars.

     It appears that few records are extant of the Prelates and
     Dignitaries of Dublin prior to the Reformation, in places where
     they might most reasonably have been expected to be found; and
     the monument itself would have perished but for the care and
     attention of the celebrated Doctor Jonathan Swift, who, with the
     Chapter, exactly a hundred years ago, rescued it from a
     dilapidated chapel, and carried the monument to its present
     situation in the Cathedral.

     Michael Tregury attained his reputation for learning at the
     University of Oxford. He was Junior Proctor in the year 1434,
     under which Anthony Wood gives the following notice of him in his
     “Fasti.” He “was now Fellow of Exeter College, and about these
     times Principal of several Halls successively that stood near to
     the said College. But the King, having a special respect for him
     (being now accounted the utmost ornament of the University), made
     him Prefect or Governor of [the College at] Caen in Normandy,
     lately erected by King Henry the Fifth of England; which office
     he performing with singular applause, became at length, through
     divers preferments (of which the Deanery of St. Michael of
     Pencryche[16] was one) Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland.”

     The foundation of the College or University of Caen, is again
     mentioned by Wood in his Annals, under 1417. In consequence, he
     says, of discontents regarding preferment and tithes, “the
     corruptness of provisions, and especially the wars between
     England and France, many dispersed themselves to other places.
     And because Normandy, Angiers, Poyctou, Aquitaine, Bretagne,
     Gascoigne, and other places that were subject to the Crown of
     England, could not for that reason exercise their Scholastical
     Arts at Paris publicly and without murmurings, they receded to
     Caen in Normandy,[17] and studied there, which place Henry the
     Fifth, of England, made an University, causing one Michael
     Tregorie, an Oxford Doctor, sometime Fellow of Exeter College, to
     be governor and reader there, to the end that the doctrine of the
     University of Oxford might dilate itself and take root in those
     parts.”

     The following memoir is extracted from Ware’s History of Ireland,
     vol. I. p. 359:

     “Before the close of the same year (1449), Michael Tregury, a
     native of Cornwall, and Doctor of Divinity of the University of
     Oxford, was consecrated Archbishop of this See. He was a man of
     such great eminence for learning and wisdom, that in the year
     1418, King Henry the Fifth invited him over to Caen in Normandy,
     to take upon him the government of a College, which that Monarch
     had then founded in the said city; to whom he joined, out of the
     Mendicant Friars, learned professors in all sciences.[18] There
     he is said to have discharged the trust committed to him with
     great applause, both by his public prelections and writings. A
     catalogue of his works may be seen in Bale and Pits. At last,
     upon the death of Talbot in 1449, he was promoted to this See by
     a papal provision, and was the same year, on the 10th of February
     (English style), restored to the temporalities by King Henry the
     Sixth, whose Chaplain he was: [But was obliged to submit himself
     to the King’s favour, and renounce every clause in his Bull
     prejudicial to the Crown.[19]] He was called into the Privy
     Council immediately, and had twenty pounds per annum[20] granted
     him by the King, _pro sano consilio_, for giving good counsel, as
     his predecessors, Archbishops of Dublin, who were of the Council,
     had; and in 1453 King Henry the Sixth, for securing an arrear of
     two years and a half, and the growing salary, granted him a
     custodium on the manor of Tassagard, and the town of Ballachise,
     parcel thereof, to continue during the time he should be
     Archbishop of Dublin.[21]

     “In certain Annals ascribed to Dudley Firbisse, there is a
     mention made under the year 1453, that an Archbishop of Dublin
     was taken prisoner at sea. I must leave the passage to the credit
     of the Annalist, not having met any hint of it elsewhere. There
     is extant in the Black Book of the Archbishop of Dublin (p. 82),
     a copy of a Bull of Pope Pius the Second, dated the 23d of
     November 1462, and directed to the Bishop and Archdeaconry of
     Ossory, commanding them to pronounce excommunicated, Geofrey
     Harold, Thomas and Edmund his sons, Patrick Birne, Thady Sheriff,
     Thomas Becagh, Robert Burnell, and other laymen of the city and
     diocese of Dublin, for laying violent hands on this Prelate, and
     committing him to prison; and that they should keep them under
     excommunication until they went to Rome for absolution, with the
     testimonials of the Bishop and Archdeacon. The reason of this
     insult is no where mentioned, that I can find. He repaired the
     manor house of Tawlaght, and died there in a very advanced age,
     on the 21st of December 1471; having governed this See about
     twenty-two years. His remains were conveyed to Dublin, attended
     by the clergy and citizens, and buried in St. Patrick’s Church,
     near St. Stephen’s altar [as he had directed by his will], where
     heretofore might have been seen a specious monument, adorned with
     his statue, of elegant workmanship, on which are inscribed the
     following verses, penned without the aid of the Muses:

          ‘Præsul Metropolis Michael hic Dubliniensis
           Marmore tumbatus, pro me Christum flagitetis.’

     And at the head of the statue,

          ‘Jesus est Salvator meus.’

     “This monument was found under the rubbish in St Stephen’s
     Chapel; the cover of it was preserved by the care of the Rev. Dr.
     Jonathan Swift, Dean of St. Patrick’s, and the Chapter, who in
     the year 1730 fixed it up in the wall, on the left hand, as you
     enter the west gate, between the said gate and the place where
     heretofore the Consistory Court was held; and they have placed
     this inscription over it: ‘Vetus hoc Monumentum, è ruderibus
     Capellæ Divi Stephani nuper instauratæ erutum, Decanus et
     Capitulum hùc transferri curaverunt, A.D. 1730.’

     “The will of this Prelate, dated the 10th of December 1471, is
     extant among the manuscripts in the Library of Trinity College,
     Dublin (B. 52), whereby he deviseth his two silver gilded
     saltsellers (salsaria) with their covers, to make cups for St.
     Patrick’s, to serve in divine offices. He also bequeathed his
     pair of organs to the said Church, to be used at the celebration
     of divine service in St. Mary’s Chapel. ‘I devise also (says he)
     that William Wyse, whose industry for this purpose I choose,
     shall in my stead visit with a decent oblation St. Michael’s
     Mount in Cornwall, which by vow I am bound to perform either by
     myself or proxy;’ and also orders him to give some largesses
     towards building the neighbouring churches near where his friends
     dwell.

     “The registry[22] of the Dominican Abbey in Dublin gives an
     account, that above fifty persons went out of the Diocese to Rome
     in 1451, to celebrate the jubilee then held under Pope Nicholas
     the fifth, and that this prelate gave them recommendatory
     certificates to the Pope; that seven of the number were pressed
     to death in the crowd, besides what died in their return. This
     squares with the relation given by Mathias Palmerius, in his
     additions to the Chronicle of Eusebius, ‘That there was so great
     a concourse of people from all parts of the Christian world at
     this jubilee, that at Hadrian’s Mole almost two hundred perished
     in the press, besides many who were drowned in the Tiber.’ They
     who returned sate in 1453, brought the melancholy news, that
     Constantinople was taken by the Turks, and the Emperor
     Constantine Palæologus slain. Our Archbishop was so afflicted at
     the account, that he ordered a fast to be kept strictly
     throughout his diocese for three days together, and granted
     indulgences of an hundred years to the observers of it; and he
     himself went before the clergy in procession to Christ Church
     cloathed in sackcloth and ashes.”

     The works of Tregury are thus noticed by Pits, in his volume “De
     illustribus Angliæ Scriptoribus:”

     “Multa scripsisse perhibetur, quæ Gallis inter quos vixit vel
     Hibernis apud quos obiit, magis quàm Anglis e quibus natus est,
     nota esse poterunt. Hos tamen paucos titulos sequentes invenio:

          Super Magistro Sententiarum       lib. iv.
          De Origine illius Studii          lib. i.
          Quæstiones Ordinarias             lib. i.
          Contra Henricum Albrincensem      lib. i.
                              Yours, &c.              DAVIES GILBERT.


_De Restitutione Temporalium Archiepiscopatus Dublinensis._

[_Rymeri Fœdera, tom. xi. p. 260._]

Rex Cancellario nostro, vel ejus deputato, seu Custodi Magni Sigilli
nostri in terrâ nostrâ Hiberniæ, qui nunc est vel qui pro tempore
fuerit, salutem. Cum dominus Summus Pontifex, nuper vacante ecclesiâ
metropolitanâ Dublinensi, per mortem bonæ memoriæ Richardi ultimi
Archiepiscopi ejusdem loci, dilectum Capellanum nostrum Magistrum
Michaelem Tregorre, sacræ theologiæ professorem, in Archiepiscopum
illius loci præfecerit et pastorem, sicut per literas bullatas ipsius
domini Summi Pontificis nobis inde directis nobis constat, Nos, pro eo
quòd idem Archiepiscopus omnibus et singulis verbis in dictis literis
bullatis contentis nobis et Coronæ nostræ prejudicialibus coram nobis
renunciavit, et gratiæ nostræ humiliter se submisit, volentes cum eo
agere gratiòse, cepimus fidelitatem ipsius Archiepiscopi, et
temporalia archiepiscopatûs illius, prout moris est, restituimus
eidem; et ideo vobis mandamus quòd eidem Archiepiscopo, seu ejus in
hac parte attornatis, deputatis, seu procuratoribus, temporalia
prædicta infra terram prædictam, cum pertinentiis, per brevia nostra
inde in cancellariâ nostrâ terræ nostræ prædictæ, tot et talia quot et
qualia sibi in hac parte necessaria fuerint, seu quomodolibet
opportuna, sub magno sigillo nostro ejusdem terræ debitè conficienda
deliberari demandetis, habenda in formâ prædictâ, cum suis juribus et
pertinentiis universis. Teste Rege apud Westmonasterium, decimo die
Februarii.

Et mandatum est militibus, liberis hominibus, et omnibus aliis
tenentibus de Archiepiscopatu prædicto infra terram nostram prædictam,
quod eidem Michaeli tanquam Archiepiscopo et domino suo in omnibus quæ
ad Archiepiscopatum prædictum pertinent, intendentes sint et
respondentes, sicut prædictum est. In cujus, &c. Teste, ut supra.


_Pro Archiepiscopo Dubliniæ._

[_Rymeri Fœdera, vol. xi. p. 325._]

Rex omnibus ad quos, &c. salutem.

Sciatis quòd, cùm venerabilis in Christo pater Michael Dublinensis
Archiepiscopus habere et percipere debeat viginti libras per annum, de
nobis pro suo sano consilio utilitatem et politicum regimen terræ
nostræ Hiberniæ concernente, nobis impenso et impendendo tempore quo
Archiepiscopus ibidem extiterit, prout ejus prædecessores,
Archiepiscopi loci prædicti, ac de consilio nostro et progenitorum
nostrorum Regum Angliæ existentes, habere solebant de nobis et
progenitoribus nostris prædictis pro hujusmodi consilio suo,――dictoque
nunc Archiepiscopo summa quinquaginta librarum, de dictis viginti
libris annuis (videlicet, a quarto die Novembris, in anno regni nostri
vicesimi-noni usque quartum diem Februarii in anno regni nostri
tricesimi-primi, scilicet per duos annos integros et unum dimidium
annum, per quod tempus ipse venerabilis pater Archiepiscopus
Dublinensis extitit, et sanum suum consilium ad utilitatem terræ
nostræ prædictæ impendit,) per nos debita jam existat,――volentes
eundem Archiepiscopum tam de dictâ summâ quinquaginta librarum
contentari, quàm de viginti libris annuis hujusmodi, pro tempore quo
ipsum Archiepiscopum ibidem fore contigerit percipiendis et habendis,
ipsum Archiepiscopum securiorem fieri et reddi, de gratiâ nostrâ
speciali ac de mero motu et certâ scientiâ nostris, commissimus eidem
nunc Archiepiscopo custodium manerii sive dominii de Tassagard cum
pertinentiis, necnon villæ de Ballachize, parcellæ manerii prædicti,
cum pertinentiis, in manu nostrâ certis de causis existentium,
habendum et tenendum eidem Archiepiscopo, unà cum proficiis,
commoditatibus, curiis, juribus, emolumentis, et pertinentiis suis
quibuscunque, per totum tempus quo ipsum Archiepiscopum Dublinensem
fore contigerit, reddendo inde nobis per annum, pro custodiâ prædictâ,
durante tempore illo, ad Scaccarium nostrum in Hiberniâ, tales et
tantas denariorum summas, de qualibus et quantis nobis pro custodiâ
manerii et villæ prædictorum cum pertinentiis modo responsum existet;
et ulteriùs volumus et præfato Archiepiscopo concedimus quòd ipse
centum solidos annuatim de denariorum summis, quæ per ipsum
Archiepiscopum de custodiâ prædictâ deberi contigerint, in manibus
suis propriis habeat et retineat, quòdque ipse dictam summam
quinquaginta librarum inde sic levaverit, perciperit, et in manibus
suis retinuerit.

Et insuper quòd ipse Archiepiscopus annuatim, durante toto termino
prædicto, quo ipse Archiepiscopus ibidem et de consilio nostro fuerit,
de hujusmodi denariis, de custodiâ prædictâ nobis per ipsum
Archiepiscopum debendis et extunc proveniendis, in manibus suis
propriis habeat et retineat viginti libras per annum, habendas,
percipiendas, et retinendas in satisfactionem dictarum viginti
librarum per annum, quas ipse Archiepiscopus pro consilio suo prædicto
de nobis per tempus prædictum percipere debet, quamdiù ipse
Archiepiscopus Dublinensis extiterit, pro sano suo consilio nobis
impendendo; et ulteriùs concedimus præfato Archiepiscopo quòd ipse, in
solutione dictarum denariorum summarum et custodiæ prædictæ, ad
Scaccarium prædictum de omnibus hujusmodi summis, quas ipse
Archiepiscopus, prætextâ harum literarum nostrarum patentium,
habuerit, perciperit, aut retinuerit, de tempore in tempus, debitam
habeat deductionem et allocationem; aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione,
sive restrictione in contrarium factis, editis, seu provisis, sive
aliquâ aliâ re, materiâ, vel causâ non obstantibus. In cujus, &c.
Teste Rege apud Westmonasterium, nono die Maii [1453].

Per Breve de Privato Sigillo.

  St. Wenn measures 3,858 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as      £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815         2963   0   0
  Poor Rates in 1831                        228   5   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    358   |    452   |    589   |    649
    giving an increase of 81 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Incumbent, the Rev. R. P. Gilbert, instituted in 1810.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish resemble those of the northern half of St.
Columb Major.


     [15] Mr. Hals has very inaccurately translated the last
     words of the second line. The Archbishop requests the
     readers of the Epitaph earnestly to entreat Christ for
     himself.

     [16] The Deanery of Penkridge in Herefordshire was not,
     however, an early preferment of Tregury, it having been
     annexed to the see of Dublin as early as the reign of King
     John.

     [17] “Jo. Rous, in lib. de Regibus, MS.”

     [18] “Pits, de Script. 663.”

     [19] See the act of restitution of his temporalities, at the
     close of this letter, p. 148.

     [20] By Sir George Shuckburgh’s Tables, printed in the
     Philosophical Transactions for 1798, this sum would be equal
     to almost six and a half times as much as the same nominal
     sum at the commencement of the present century; that is,
     130_l._ a year.

     [21] See the letters patent hereafter, p. 149.

     [22] Ware’s MSS.




WHITSTONE.


HALS.

Whitstone is situate in the hundred of Stratton, and hath upon
the north part of Bridgerule and Marhamchurch, west Wike St. Mary
and Tamerton, south Werrington and St. Stephen’s.

In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294,
Ecclesia de Witeston, in decanatu de Trigmajorshire, was valued
at £4. 6_s._ 8_d._ In Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, £14. 11_s._
0½_d._ The patronage in the Bishop of Exeter, who endowed it; the
incumbent Tregena or Hosken; and the parish rated to the four
shillings per pound Land Tax, 1696, for one year £124. 12_s._
6_d._ tempore William III.

The barton of Benett, in this parish, was formerly the seat of
George Heale, esq. Sheriff of Cornwall, 4 and 5 of Charles I.
that married ――――; as also of Edmund Hele, esq. his son,
Sheriff of Cornwall, 22 Charles I. whose son dying without issue,
those lands and much other descended to his daughter Lucy, the
wife of John Basset, of Tehidy, esq. now in possession thereof.
The name Hele, Heale, is Saxon English, and signifies the same as
hell in British, viz. a hall, either of a dwelling house or
refectory, or a place of judicature or prætorium, a tabernacle or
a tent.

The arms of Heale are Gules, a bend lozengy Ermine.


TONKIN.

Whitston is in the hundred of Stratton, and hath to the west St.
Mary Week, to the north Marhamchurch and Bridgerule, to the east
the river Tamar, between it and Devon, to the south Tamerton.

The name of the parish is derived from a white rock, on which
part of the church is founded. It is a large white  stone in
the south side of the church; the part which appears is of an
oval form. This account I had from Mr. Nicholas Hoskins, jun. and
vicar of Boyton, son to the rector of this.

In anno 1291, 20 Edw. I. this church was valued (Tax. Benef.) at
£4. 6_s._ 8_d._ having never been appropriated.

This church is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book, £14. 11_s._
ob.; the patronage in the heirs of Sir John Arundell; the
incumbent Mr. Nicholas Hoskins.


THE MANOR OF WHITESTONE.

This, in Domesday Book, is called Witestan, being one of the
manors given by William the Conqueror to Robert Earl of Morton,
when he created Earl of Cornwall the said Robert.

In the extent of Cornish acres, 12 Edw. I. (Car. f. 48), this, by
the name of Wilston and St. Petnell (St. Petronel, I suppose), is
valued in two.

The 3 Henry IV. (Idem, f. 40 b.) John de Cobbeham held one fee in
Wiston and Serpeknol, which I take to be the same with the
former, only wrong spelt.

[The name of the parish is not derived, I apprehend, from any
white stone on which the church is founded. From the very
description here given of it, it could never have given name to
the church itself. Only “part of the church is founded” on it.
Nor is this part “founded” on it. There is only “a large white
stone in the south side of the church;” and this is plainly built
up in the side, as it is said to be “of an oval form.” The
reference of the name to this stone, therefore, has been merely
the idle play of intellect, in those who in antiquarian matters
did not know how to exert their understandimg seriously. The real
name of the church is “St. Petnell, St. Petronel, I suppose.” The
church then could not give name to the parish. And the parish
actually received its name from the manor, as the manor received
it from its manerial house, this being built upon a white rock, that
very rock assuredly from which the white stone in the wall of the
church had been brought. W.]


THE EDITOR.

The church and tower of this parish, like several others in the
north-eastern part of Cornwall, are fine objects in themselves, and
are placed on commanding situations.

There are several monuments to former residents and proprietors in the
parish. Among these is one to the memory of George Hele, of Bennetts,
esq. who died in 1652, and of his son Warwick Hele, who died in 1650.
The family of Hele had resided for many generations at Bennetts, which
came into the Basset family in the latter part of that century, by the
marriage of John Basset, esq. of Tehidy, with Lucy Hele. Their
great-grandson, the late Lord Dunstanville, was in the habit of
visiting Bennetts for several weeks at a time. This place had been
leased for lives to a respectable family of the name of Webbe,
probably soon after it came to Mr. John Basset.

The advowson of the living belonged to the Arundells of Lanherne and
Wardour, who sold it about fifty years ago; and, after passing through
various hands, it came to the Rev. John Kingdon, who is also the
incumbent, instituted in 1793. The net value of the living in 1831 was
£231.

  Whitstone measures 3429 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as     £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815        1832   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                        205  13   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    345   |    397   |    466   |    481
    giving an increase of 40 per cent. in 30 years.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

Whitstone, like all the other parishes in this division of Cornwall,
is situated on the calcareous series, more particularly on the compact
schistose varieties of dunstone.




ST. WINNOW.


HALS.

St. Wennoe is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the north
Braddock and Cardenham, west the Foye river or sea, south St. Veepe,
east Lanreth.

In the glass windows of this church, the Patron Saint is called after
the Latin St. (Sanctus) Winotus, but further knowledge of him I have
not.

In the Domesday Book 1087, this district was taxed by the name of
Tre-vocar-Winoe. In the Inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and
Winchester, 1294, Ecclesia de Sancto Winotho was valued lx_s._ In
Wolsey’s Inquisition 1521, it was rated 5_l._ The Patronage in      ;
the incumbent Laurence; the rectory in possession of ――――; and the
parish rated at 4_s._ per pound Land Tax, 1696, for one year, £210.
8_s._ 8_d._

In this parish is a chapel of ease dedicated to St. Nectan, _vulgo
vocat._ St. Knighton, or Nighton, whose revenues in the Inquisition of
the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester 1294, were thus rated, Capella
de Nectan, in decanatu de West, v_s._ This Nectan was born in Devon
about the year 940, a man of singular piety and holiness, as most of
those days afforded, who lived a monkish or eremitical life, at
Hartland, in Devon, where he died about the year 1010. After his death
his relics (see Rawlegh’s Relicta Nomen viri) were enshrined and set
up in the same little chapel where he served God there; in which place
Githa, wife of Godwin Earl of Kent (or rather Goditha his daughter,
afterwards married to Edward the Confessor), as Malmesbury informs us,
1030, built and endowed a monastery of secular priests, which might
marry wives; valued at the suppression, 26 Hen. VIII. at £350 per
annum; and the reason of this her pious foundation is said to be, for
that she was fully persuaded that her husband, Earl Godwin, escaped
the danger of a shipwreck in a raging tempest at sea by his merits and
intercessions.

Galfrid de Dynham, Lord of Hartland, was a great benefactor to this
monastery, and changed the Secular Priests into Black Canons
Augustine, who were prohibited marriage by their rule. See the
Monasticon Anglicanum, tome II. p. 285, concerning Nectan and
Hartland.

This barton and manor of St. Winow gave name and original to an old
family of gentlemen, from thence surnamed de St. Winow, of which
family was that Philip de St. Winow, who had £20 lands and upwards in
this place, held by the tenure of knight service, 25 Edward III. 1352
(Survey of Cornwall, p. 52,) from whose heirs it passed by descent or
purchase about Henry VIth’s time to ―――― Upton, which Upton was
originally descended either from the Uptons of Upton and Colombton, or
Lupton, in Brixham parish, in Devon, whose elder brother’s estate
passed by his daughter and heir in marriage to the Wingfields; as also
the estate of this Upton of St. Winow did by marriage with his
daughter and heir to William Lower, esq. of Trelaske, in Lawanack,
Sheriff of Cornwall 16 Henry VIII. 1525. William Lower, esq. his son,
or grandson, was Sheriff of Cornwall 20th of Elizabeth; he married one
of Reskimer’s heirs, and had issue Nicholas Lower, esq. afterwards
knighted, Sheriff of Cornwall 8 Charles I. Sir Nicholas married ――――,
and had issue one only daughter, that became his heir, and was married
to Sir William Drummond, knight, who had issue by her two daughters
that became his heirs; the one married to Charles Trevanion, of
Caryhayes, esq. and to ―――― Roper, esq. now Lord of this place in fee.
The possession by lease in Stephen Robins, esq. Sheriff of Cornwall
about the year 1700, who married ―――― Robins, his father William of
Probus, and giveth for his arms the same as Robins of Verian.

Tethe, in this parish, alias Eade or Ethy, was the seat of some of the
Courtneys of Boconnock, from whose heirs it passed by purchase, as I
am informed, to John Trevill, esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 18 Charles II.
whose three daughters and heirs carried those lands, together with
themselves, in marriage, to Burthog, Savery, and Arscott; but
Arscott’s lady dying under age, he purchased this barton and manor of
Tethe, or Ethy, from Burthog and Savery, whose younger son Denis
Arscott, esq. Sheriff of Cornwall 4th King George, was then in
possession thereof.

Tre-vego, alias Tre-vega, in this parish, that is to say, the town
upon the top of a stiff hill or precipice, according to the natural
circumstances of the place, is the dwelling of Warwick Hankey, esq.
barrister-at-law, that married Jane, daughter of Giles Risdon, of
Babeleigh, esq.

In this parish stands Lar-an Bridge, i. e. the Floor Bridge.


TONKIN.

The tutelar saint of this parish is St. Winnocus (Moreri’s Dictionary,
vol. I. voce Bergh St. Vinoc), who was born in Armorica, or Little
Britain, and having associated himself about the year 680 with St.
Bertin, Abbat of Sithien, established a monastery at a place in
Flanders, and died there the 6th of November 717, which place has been
once called from him Bergh St. Winnox, a town being built there and
surrounded with walls in 950; since that it has been regularly
fortified, belongs to the French, and is about four miles from
Dunkirk.

This is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book at £5.; the patronage in
the Dean and Chapter of Exeter; the incumbent Mr. Thomas Laurenc.

In 1291, 20 Edward I. this church was valued (Tax. Benef.) at cx_s._
being appropriated to the Chapter of Exeter; and the chapel of St.
Nectan at v_s._


THE EDITOR.

The Church of St. Winnow is beautifully situated on the eastern bank
of the river, at its most beautiful part, between Lestwithiel and
Fowey. The church, with its tower, are fine objects as seen from the
river, which does not yield in this spot to the Dart itself. The
Church contains several monuments.

The vicarage house and glebe partake of the splendour of the scenery;
and during the life of their late proprietor, the Reverend Robert
Walker, were among the most attractive spots in Cornwall. Mr. Walker,
possessed of strong abilities, had an ardent desire to discharge all
the duties attached to him as a clergyman and as a country gentleman,
in a manner the most beneficial to all with whom he had any concern;
in the relations of private life he was equally estimable; and as a
most decisive proof of his real merits and high deserts, it may be
truly said, that, although he was induced on principle to take a
strong part in politics, he had not a single personal enemy.

The chapel, dedicated to the Recluse of Hertland, has still divine
service occasionally performed in it, although it does not form any
practical division of the parish.

The history of Ethy has been brought down to the period immediately
preceding its possession by the Edgecumbe family; the house has been
occupied of late years by several gentlemen, and especially by one who
has done honour to the nation by his naval and military services, and
to Cornwall as a private man. Admiral Sir Charles Vinicombe Penrose
distinguished himself on so many occasions, that to enumerate them all
would be to write a life. Two, which do not relate immediately to the
more obvious features of the military profession, may, however, be
selected.

In the year 1797, when the navy of England underwent the greatest
disgrace it has ever experienced, by the prevalence of a mutiny which
threatened our safety as a country, this excellent officer preserved
his ship in due subordination.

In the year 1814, when the Duke of Wellington invaded France from the
Pyrenees, and his passage was disputed across the Adour, Admiral
Penrose, uniting to scientific acquirements the skill and the bravery
of an English seaman, constructed a bridge of boats where it was
thought impossible to place them, and thus greatly contributed to the
success of this important part of the combined attack.

In the Parliamentary Edition of the Taxatio Ecclesiastica of Pope
Nicholas IV. p. 145, the entries respecting St. Winnowe are as follow:

                                   £. _s._ _d._
     Eccl’ia de S’c’o Winnico      2   10   0
     Vicar’ ejusdem                1    0   0

  This parish measures 5,501 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as     £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815        4304   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                        603  14   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    671   |    782   |    906   |    1048
    giving an increase of 56 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. Percival Frye, who succeeded the Rev. W.
    Molesworth in 1834, on the presentation of the Dean and Chapter of
    Exeter. Mr. Molesworth had been instituted in 1816. The clear
    value of the benefice in 1831 was £197.


GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

The rocks of this parish are similar to those of the adjoining
parishes, Broadoak, Boconnoc, and St. Veep.




WITHIEL.


HALS.

Withiel is situate in the hundred of Pider, and hath upon the north
St. Breock, east Lannyvet, south Roach, west St. Wenn. As for those
names, they are synonymous in Cornish, and signify in that phrase, a
place of trees, which heretofore it was; and is so called, for that
this church is situate upon the manor of Withell Goose, i. e. Tree
Wood, or a place heretofore consisting in its voke lands of a wood of
trees (neither is it altogether destitute of wood and trees to this
day, though within the memory of man, much of them have been cut down
for buildings and charcoal there, and all the parish over).

At the time of the Norman Conquest, this district was rated in the
Domesday Book by the name of Ber-neves (still the voke lands of a
manor in this parish, of which, see more under), as also Trenant or
Trenance. In the inquisition of the Bishops of Lincoln and Winchester
into the value of Cornish Benefices, Ecclesia de Withell, in decanatu
de Pider, was rated at £4. In Wolsey’s Inquisition, 1621, £10. The
patronage was formerly in the Prior of Bodman, who endowed it out of
his manor of Withell Goos aforesaid; which lands and patronage, when
that Priory was dissolved, fell to the Crown, from whence it passed to
Glanvill of Killivor; from Glanvill to Vivian of Truan; from Vivian of
Truan, by marriage of his daughter, to Vivian of Trelowarren, now in
possession thereof; the incumbent ―――― Wood; and the parish rated to
the four shillings per pound Land Tax 1696, for one year, tempore
William III. £18. 4_s._ 2_d._

Thomas Vivian, Prior of St. Pedyr at Bodmyn, Bishop of Megara, a city
of Achaia in Greece, on the borders of Attica, built the rectory house
in this place, as appears from his paternal coat armour, and that of
the arms of Megara bishoprick, lately extant in the glass windows
thereof, tempore Henry VII. and VIII.

Bor, Ber, or Bur-nevas or Nefas, is still the voke lands of an ancient
dismembered manor, taxed as aforesaid, otherwise Buro-neves.

Tre-nance in this parish, i. e. the valley town, or town in the
valley, was also rated in the Domesday Book 1087, as then the voke
lands of a manor, which place gave name and original to an old family
of gentlemen surnamed de Trenance, one of which family married
Littleton’s heir, and afterwards removed to Lanhydrock, whereof they
were lords, tempore James I. when Littleton Trenance, esq. sold that
barton to the Lord Robartes, as a younger branch of this family,
living at Black Haye in this parish, sold Trenance to Mapowder; and
Mapowder sold it to Bone; Bone gave it to Harris of St. Stephen’s; and
Harris sold it to Hawkins, now in possession of part thereof. The
other moiety of this little barton of Trenance, is in possession of
the Arundells of Lanherne.

John Trenance of Black Haye, gent. had issue by ―――― ―――― only three
daughters, married to Elford of Roach or St. Dennis, Buckingham of
Probus, and Randolph of this parish; the which Mr. Elford is now in
possession thereof [who sold it to Pomery his son-in-law, who leased
it to Mr. Trewerne, Rector of Withell.[23]]

The arms of Trenance, out of a supposed allusion to their name, after
the Latin, is taken as a corruption of Tre-ensis, i. e. three swords;
whereas, Trenance is the name of a local place, and signifies as
aforesaid, and Try-clothes, Try-glodes, is three swords.

Bryn, i. e. a hill or lofty place, tempore Edward IV. was the lands of
Beare of Killygarth, by whose daughter and heir it came in marriage,
together with his other lands, to Peter Bevill, a younger branch of
Gwarnack house; whose son, Sir William Bevill, dying without issue
male, his brother, Philip Bevill, became his heir; who had issue only
one daughter named Elizabeth, which was married to Sir Bernard
Grenville of Stowe, knight, in whose issue by her, the name, blood,
and estate of this Bevill is terminated. The which Sir Bernard, and
his lady big with child, for health and diversion residing at Bryn
aforesaid, the said lady happened to fall into childbirth, and there
was well delivered of her first-born son, who afterwards was baptised
at the font by the name of Bevill; which afterwards proved to be that
famous and renowned though unfortunate hero, Sir Bevill Grenville,
knight, slain at Lansdowne in Somerset, on the part and behalf of King
Charles I. against the parliament army.

Bryn is still the lands of Grenville, and by lease in possession of
Robins, who as I have heard, hath since purchased the fee thereof from
Grenville’s heirs.


TONKIN.

Withiel is in the hundred of Pider, the manor and manorial house, I
believe, being denominated only from the personal name of its owner,
Withiel.

In anno 1291, 20 Edward I. this church was valued (Tax. Ben.) at £4.
being appropriated to the Priory of Bodmin.

This is a rectory, valued in the King’s Book £10.; the patronage in
Sir Francis Vyvyan, Bart.; the incumbent Mr. Richard Trewren, who
succeeded Mr. William Wood in 17――.

The 12 Edward I. this manor, in the extent of Cornish acres, was
valued in fifteen. (Carew, fol. 46 b.)


THE EDITOR.

Withiel does not present any thing in addition to what has been said
of it.

Mr. Lysons does not give any information of the least interest
respecting property in the parish. The larger portion belongs to the
Vyvyans of Trelowarren, as well as the advowson. A younger brother of
that family, the Rev. Vyal Vyvyan, is the present incumbent, and this
gentlemen has greatly improved the house.

There is a monument in the church to the Reverend Richard Trewren, his
wife, and two daughters, one the widow of Mr. Ustick of Pendavey,
which place he sold to the Molesworths of Peranrow. Mr. Trewren was a
brother of the family of Tredreva in Constantine: he married Catherine
Davies, a sister of the Editor’s grandfather.

  This parish measures 2,517 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property as      £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815        2,109   0   0
  Poor Rate in 1831                          72   5   0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    283   |    299   |    339   |    406
    giving an increase of 43½ per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Rector, the Rev. Vyell Francis Vyvyan, presented by his
    brother Sir R. R. Vyvyan, Bart, in 1825. The net income of the
    living returned in 1831 was 324_l._


THE GEOLOGY, BY DOCTOR BOASE.

This parish has the same geological structure as St. Wenn, to which it
adjoins.


     [23] This is a more recent insertion.




ZENNAR.


HALS.

Zennar is situated in the hundred of Penwith, and hath upon the north
the Irish sea, north-east Tywidneck, south Maddarne. For the name, if
it be compounded of Sen-nar, it signifies Holy Pool or Lake;
otherwise, if it be a corruption of Se-nar or Seynar, English Cornish,
it signifies the sea lake, or creek of the sea; and the church is
situated in a valley near the sea, with a rivulet of water flowing by
it.

At the time of the Norman Conquest, this district was taxed under the
jurisdiction of Trenwith, or of Alvorton. When the first inquisition
into the value of Cornish Benefices was made, this church was not
endowed, if extant; however, in Wolsey’s Inquisition (1521), it was
rated by the name of Zennor or Sennor £5. 5_s._ The patronage in the
Bishop of Exeter. This parish was rated to the four shillings in the
pound Land Tax in 1696, for one year, at £86. 10_s._

This church, I take it, was endowed by the Prior of St. Michael’s
Mount, and was formerly wholly impropriate. This parish is
comparatively scattered all over with stones and rocks of great
bigness; yet amongst those are found very many fertile plots of ground
for corn, grass, and barley, as also many tin lodes, tending to the
great profit of the farmers and tinners thereof.

In this parish are the ruins of an old free chapel called Chapel Jane,
that is the narrow chapel.


TONKIN.

Zennar is in the hundred of Penwith, is bounded to the west by Morva,
to the north by the main ocean, to the east by Tawednack, to the south
by Madderne.

This parish takes its name from its tutelar saint.

This is a vicarage, valued in the King’s Book £5. 5_s._ the patronage
in the Bishop of Exeter; the incumbent Mr. Oliver.


THE EDITOR.

This parish is beautifully situated, mainly consisting of a belt
nearly a mile wide, between the sea on one hand, bounded by high and
rocky cliffs, and on the other hand by a chain of granite mountains.

The belt of land, including the church town, is very fertile,
particularly abounding in milk and honey, which we early learn to
consider as proofs of the most abundant soil.

The church and tower are neat and plain, and it is probable that Mr.
Hals’s conjecture respecting its ancient dependence on St. Michael’s
Mount, may be correct, since one or more of the bells are said to bear
an inscription declaring them the gift of the prior of the Mount.

Mr. Tonkin says, that the name is taken from a patron Saint, but no
such saint can be found; and the parish feast is kept on the nearest
Sunday to the 6th of May, when the festival is observed by the Church
of Rome, in commemoration of the virtual martyrdom and miraculous
preservation of St. John the Evangelist; when, by the order of
Domitian, he was cast into a caldron of boiling oil before the Latin
or Lateran Gate of Rome, where the church of St. John Lateran has
since been built, the chief sacred edifice in Rome previously to the
construction of St. Peter’s, and celebrated for the assemblage of
various general councils of the Catholic Church, thence denominated
Councils of Lateran. It is probable, therefore, that this parish may
be under the protection of the divine and beloved Apostle.

Towards the western extremity of the parish a bold promontory
stretches out into the sea, called Trereen Dinas, but in recent times,
from some fanciful resemblance, the Gurnet’s Head. This is by much the
finest and most romantic point on the north side of the Land’s End,
and it would rival the promontory nearly opposite to it on the south,
called by the same name, Trereen Dinas, or Castle Trereen, if that
were not composed of granite and crowned by the Logging Rock; while in
Zennar the sea shore and the cliffs are every where green stone,
surrounding the granite.

For a description of this headland, see the Second Volume of the
Transactions of the Royal Geological Society of Cornwall, p. 200. The
Editor was so much struck with the appearance of this bold formation,
that he purchased the manor of Treen and Baswedneck chiefly for the
purpose of acquiring the property of a mass of rocks so geologically
interesting.

The impropriation of the great tithes belongs to George John, esq. of
Rosemorron, and of Penzance.

  Zennar measures 3,647 statute acres.
  Annual value of the Real Property, as     £.  _s._ _d._
    returned to Parliament in 1815        2,137   0    0
  Poor Rate in 1831                         187   5    0
  Population,――{ in 1801, | in 1811, | in 1821, | in 1831,
               {    544   |    671   |    715   |    811
    giving an increase of 49 per cent. in 30 years.
  Present Vicar, the Rev. W. Veale, collated in 1824 by Dr. Carey, the
    Bishop of Exeter. The net income of the living, as returned in 1831,
    was £179.


THE GEOLOGY, BY DR. BOASE.

The greater part of this parish is situated on granite, which presents
the varieties common to the Land’s End district. The northern part, in
the form of an irregular band, consists of schistose rocks, with the
exception of a small patch a little to the north of the church, and
another which extends from Polmear Cove to the western boundary of the
parish. These slates are for the most part felspathic, and, at their
points of junction with the granite, exhibit some beautiful
illustrations of granitic veins in the slate.

       *     *     *     *     *

Note, that Penzance, by a mistake, is not numbered among the parishes
[nor is Tregoney]; so that the real number of them must be 204 [or
rather 205].


GENERAL REMARKS ADDED HERE BY MR. WHITAKER.

It is stated by Carew:

Fol. 8. “They [the Cornish Tinners] maintaine these workes [“two kind
of Tynne workes, _Stream_ and _Load_”] to have beene verie auncient,
and first wrought by the Jewes with _Pick-axes_ of holme, boxe, and
_hartshorne_: they prove this by the name of those places yet
enduring, to wit _Attall Sarazin_, in English, the _Jewes’ Offcast_,
and by _those tooles daily_ found amongst the _rubble of such
workes_.” So, in the stream-work now prosecuted at Carne between Truro
and Penrin, were found two stems of deer-horns, which I inspected at
Tregothnan in Nov. 1792, and which had been plainly shaped into
pickaxes. One of them was even tinged strongly at the picking end,
with the stain of some metallic matter on which it has been employed.

Not far from them was found a brass instrument, that had clearly, from
the shade still remaining upon the covered part, once had a handle
clipping it round the middle, and leaving out the two ends for
striking. July 19, 1794, was promised by Lady Falmouth a sketch of all
three, done by the hand of the Rev. Mr. Hennah, Rector of St. Austle;
but, as he had pronounced the brass instrument to be no celt, and as I
proved it to be one, he never sent the sketch.

“There are also taken up in such works,” adds Carew, “certaine little
tooles’ heads of brasse, which some terme thunder axes; but they make
small show of any profitable use. Neither were the Romaines ignorant
of this trade, as may appeare by a brasse coyne of DOMITIAN’S, found
in one of these workes,” stream or load, “and fallen into my hands.”

Fol. 56. “Most of the inhabitants can [speak] no word of Cornish, but
_very few_ are ignorant of the English; and yet _some so affect their
owne_, as to _a stranger they will not speake it_: for, if meeting
them by chance, you inquire the way or any such matter, your answer
shal be, _Meea navidua cowzasawsneck_, I can speake no Saxonage.” W.]




THE ISLANDS OF SCILLY.


THE EDITOR.

Neither Mr. Hals nor Mr. Tonkin has noticed these islands.

It may be proper, therefore, to add a few observations on their
ancient history, of which however very little is known.

That the Phœnicians, and after them the merchants of Carthage, traded
with the Britons for tin, is established without the slightest doubt;
but no possible absurdity can be greater than the supposition that
voyagers, having sailed through the Mediterranean Sea, and passed
between the Pillars of Hercules into the exterior ocean, and navigated
through this boundless and dreaded expanse of water for about a
thousand miles, should then stop short at trifling islands, or rather
rocks, and that too year after year during centuries, with the country
before them, actually in sight, from whence the valuable commodity
which they sought must have been manifestly taken, and where they
would have been sure of an improved market for the commercial articles
to be given in exchange. Yet, relying on the literal interpretation of
passages from ancient authors, who never visited the land of tin, nor
possibly ever conversed with the adventurous sailors who had been
there, persons of account have gravely asserted that the rocks of
Scilly were the ancient Cassiterides; while others, to render this
strange supposition somewhat less absurd, have glossed it with the
miracle, probably invented by Florence of Worcester, of a large tract
of country between these existing islands and the Land’s End, having
been engulphed within times of recent memory.

Perhaps this mode of induction, directly opposed to common sense and
to experience, may be a remnant of the hallucination which bound
itself round men’s minds at the period when the stores of ancient
learning were first poured on modern Europe; under this delusion they
were not contented with ascribing a high degree of merit to the
artists, to the writers, to the architects of Greece and Rome; nothing
short of absolute perfection was believed to exist in each, and this
servile appeal to authority is not even yet quite obsolete, although
the time for such delusions being in the slightest degree advantageous
either to literature or to science, has long since passed by.

The traders who frequented these remote shores would naturally mistake
land in the great unbounded ocean for mere islands, and their vague
descriptions, purposely made obscure, proved so successful that Julius
Cæsar was not aware when he landed on the coast of Kent that he was
arrived in the country producing tin.

The rocks of Scilly, having inhabitants, were visited by monks and
anchorites, who formed establishments there, and gradually associated
themselves into a small priory; but, so early as the time of King
Henry the First, their monastery, with all its appendages, was given
to the Abbey of Tavistock. The grant is extant.

     “Henricus Rex Anglorum Willelmo Episcopo Excestriæ et
     Ricardo filio Baldwini, et Justiciæ suæ de Devenesira et
     Cornegallia, salutem. Sciatis me dedisse in perpetuam
     elemosinam Osberto Abbati et Ecclesiæ de Tavystok, et
     Turoldo Monacho suo, omnes Ecclesias de Sullye cum
     pertinentiis suis, et terram sicut unquam Monachi aut
     Heremitæ melius eam tenuerunt tempore Regis Edwardi, et
     Burgaldi Episcopi Cornegalliæ. Et volo et præcipio quod ipse
     Turoldus et omnes Monachi de Sully sicut proprii Præbendarii
     mei habeant firmam pacem cum omnibus quæ ad eas pertinent,”
     &c.

There is also a confirmation by Reginald de Dunstanville, illegitimate
son of King Henry the First, who was created Earl of Cornwall in 1140,
and died without male issue in 1175.

     “Reginaldus Regis Filius Comes Cornubiæ, omnibus Baronibus suis
     et Ballivis suis Cornubiæ et Scilly, salutem. Sciatis me, pro
     anima Henrici Regis patris mei, et mea, et pro Carta ipsius quam
     vidi, concessisse et confirmasse in liberam et perpetuam
     elemosinam Monachis de Sully, sicut propriis Præbendariis Patris
     mei, omne WREC quod in Insulis, quas ipsi totas tenent,
     advenerit; præter cœtum et navem integram, hoc est, in Rentemen
     et Nurcho et insula Sancti Elidii et Sancti Sampsonis, et Sanctæ
     Teonæ. Et prohibeo super forisfactum meum, sicut prohibuit pater
     meus per cartam suam, ne quis eis aliquam injuriam faciat aut
     molestiam. Quoniam nolo ut de aliquo tenemento suo in Scilly aut
     libertate aut consuetudine, quam eis concessi, alicui amodo
     intendant nisi michi[24] et Abbati Tavistochiæ.

     “Teste Radulpho de Bosco-Roardi apud Dorecestriam.”

There is also another document, entitled,

“Confirmatio B. Episcopi Exoniæ de Decimis de Sully.”――It is probable
that the person indicated by B, was Bartholomew Iscan, consecrated in
1161, and died in 1184.

     “Omnibus fidelibus ad quos præsens scriptura pervenerit, B.
     divina miseratione dictus Episcopus Exoniæ salutem in Domino.
     Noverit universitas vestra me vidisse et legisse cartam Ricardi
     de Wicha, in qua confitetur se concessisse, et in liberam et
     perpetuam elemosinam dedisse omnes decimas suas de Sully (et
     nominatim de cuniculis, quas injuste aliquandiu detinuerat, eo
     quod de rebus hujusmodi decimas dandas esse non putavit,) Abbati
     et Conventui Tavistochiæ, et Fratribus Monasterii Beati
     Confessoris Nicholai de Sully, pro salute animæ suæ, et parentum
     suorum, necnon et Reginaldi quondam Comitis Cornubiæ Domini sui;
     et hanc donationem super altare Beati Rumoni Tavistochiæ per
     Librum Evangeliorum manu propria obtulisse in præsentia B.
     Abbatis et conventus ejusdem loci et multorum aliorum.

     “Quoniam autem tam Monasterium Tavistochiæ, quam tota terra
     prædicti Ricardi de Sully ad meam pertinet Diocesim, ego sicut
     Episcopus diocesanus prænotatam ipsius Ricardi donationem,
     auctoritate episcopali, præsenti scripto, et sigilli mei, sicut
     eam quam gratam et ratam habeo, appositione confirmo.

     “Hiis testibus, B. Archidiacono Cornubiensi, &c.”

There is also a letter of protection from King Edward the First for
the prior of St. Nicholas, within his island de Scilly. This letter is
addressed among others, to the constable of his camp in the island of
Enmour in Scilly.

Enmour may well be a corruption of Ennis Moor, the great island,
possibly the secular name of St. Mary’s.

In the time of Edward the Third, this priory or cell to Tavistock must
have been of very little importance, since in the 19th year of his
reign, it appears by the following entry in the Abbreviatio Rotulorum
Originalium, that two monks only were resident. Since, for some reason
which it is difficult to discover, secular priests were to be
stationed in Scilly during the continuance of a war with France,
instead of the monks, which gave rise to the following agreement:

     “Abbas et Conventus de Tavistok finem fecerunt cum Rege per
     viginti solidos, pro licentia habenda, quod ipsi duos capellanos
     sæculares pro animabus progenitorum Regis, quondam Regum Angliæ,
     et hæredum suorum, in Insula de Sulley celebraturos, loco duorum
     Capellanorum commonachorum suorum, quos ibidem ex causa prædicta
     invenire solebant, durante guerra inter Regem et homines de
     Francia mota, invenire possint.”

Since the Reformation the tithes have been appropriated, and passed
with the different leases of the lands. Remains of the convent, most
properly dedicated to St. Nicholas, are still to be seen on the island
of Trescow. St. Nicholas was the patron of mariners, and frequently
preserved vessels in a miraculous manner when his aid had been
fervently invoked; perhaps the right of wreck was given to the convent
for the pupose of attaching an increased degree of merit to their
prayers in favour of ships likely to be dashed against those rocks.

St. Nicholas had also delegated to him from Heaven the peculiar care
of infants, as a reward for his early piety, which induced him, in the
first month, to abstain from taking the nourishment afforded by his
mother’s breast on Wednesdays and Fridays, and on all occasional fasts
appointed by the church.

He was Archbishop of Myra, a city of Lycia, in Lesser Asia, where he
died in 342; but in 1087 his relics were forcibly taken from thence,
and conveyed to the town of Bavi in Italy, towards the opening of the
Adriatic, and where they continue to perform the most wonderful cures,
more especially in all cases of infants.

The Scilly Islands first became objects of public attention in the
great civil war, and especially towards the latter part of these
struggles. After the death of King Charles the First, Sir John
Grenville, subsequently created Earl of Bath in memory of the battle
at Lansdown, where his father fell in the arms of victory, having
collected a small force, kept possession of St. Mary’s island, where
they either constructed or enlarged lines, rather than a fortress,
which still remain. Their opponents encamped themselves on Trescow,
till at last, as relief was clearly impossible, the cavaliers
surrendered, but not till they had evinced their honour and true
feelings as gentlemen, by refusing to accept any terms from a foreign
power, and preserving the integrity of England, although it was in the
hands of their deadly foes.

Unfortunately for these islands, they remain public property, or as it
is termed, belong to the Crown; and a system has prevailed, at least
from the time of Queen Elizabeth, one of the very worst that could be
devised, of granting them at an annual rent, and for a short term of
years, to private gentlemen; renewed, indeed, in the same line for
more than two hundred years, first to the family of Godolphin, and
then to the family of Osborne, which succeeded to the property of the
former, but always with an uncertain tenure and the impossibility of
encouraging others to expend capital on any permanent undertaking.

A better system has, however, been at last adopted, although very
inferior to the plain, simple, and natural one of making the land
freeholds in the hands of individuals.

Either the former lessee for years no longer wished to retain a source
of small patronage, rendered of little importance by well-known
changes, or the government resolved on doing something beneficial for
the inhabitants and for the country; at all events, a lease for lives
has now been granted to Mr. Smith, a gentleman of ability and
information, the eldest son of a respectable country gentleman, under
certain conditions, and among them a stipulation for essentially
improving the harbour by the construction of a pier, the government
contributing a certain sum towards the expense, and the lessee
undertaking to complete the work. Mr. Smith, it is understood, means
to reside there; and great expectations are entertained of the benefit
likely to result.

Such a cluster of rocks, from eight to nine leagues west-south-west
off the main land, must always be dangerous to ships returning from
distant voyages; but the risk has been very greatly diminished by the
excellent light on St. Agnes. There is, however, one rock called the
Wolf, somewhat more than a third of the distance of Scilly from the
Land’s End, on which a light-house might be erected; and the losses of
lives and of property on this rock, which lies immediately in the way
of all coasting vessels, more especially of those from Ireland, are
supposed by many competent judges to exceed the losses occasioned by
all the other western rocks taken together.

Before lights were placed on the coast, and the soundings laid down
with accuracy, and the nature of the ground described, and before
astronomical observations were brought to practical perfection, the
wrecks were, perhaps, quadruple to what they are at present, and with
not one fourth of the vessels at sea: among the innumerable wrecks
that have taken place at Scilly, the most remarkable is that of the
Victory, a first-rate ship of war, commanded by Sir Cloudesley Shovel,
returning from a series of exploits, which continued adding to his
reputation even when they failed of obtaining success. This ship, with
two others of a smaller size, struck on the rocks of Scilly in the
night following the 22d of October 1705, when between fifteen hundred
and two thousand men are supposed to have perished; and there is a
tradition of one man having escaped, and of his relating some
anecdotes of obstinacy, and even of violence, on the part of the
Admiral, discreditable to him as a man, and the immediate causes of
the calamity; but these additions induce me entirely to disbelieve the
whole tale.

The Scilly Islands are composed of granite, similar to that of the
Land’s End district, and intersected by small lodes of tin, but not of
a size sufficiently large to have produced at any period a quantity
worthy of mercantile account.

The land does not rise into lofty hills, nor are the rocks on a scale
of magnificence; and the people have been so much absorbed in trade
and in intercourse with strangers from all nations, that they are
without any legendary histories or peculiarity of manners.

Although St. Mary’s, Trescow, and St. Agnes’, St. Martin’s, Bryher,
and Sampson, have alone permanent inhabitants, yet a great many more
islands are dignified with specific names. Among these one rock is
honoured with the appellation of Scilly; and this trifling
circumstance has given rise to theories about changes and devastations
by the sea, by earthquakes, &c. when the name has clearly been given
in the same spirit as that which induced seamen to declare that the
cord attached to the water bucket is the only rope belonging to a ship.

Alterations in the laws respecting Customs and Excise, with increased
vigilance as well as greater activity, both at sea and on shore, have
materially interfered with the most lucrative trade of these
islanders. They are, however, tolerably well supported by their
agriculture, which is said to afford more corn than they consume; by
their fisheries, particularly of ling, which are exported after being
pressed and dried almost without salt; and finally, by the resort of
ships in great numbers when the wind happens to be in opposition to
their intended voyages.

Doctor Borlase has written a separate treatise on the Scilly Islands,
and described in it the scanty remains of their supposed Druidical
antiquities.

At the time of the last census (in 1831) the population was as
ascertained to be

                                            Statute Acres.
     St. Mary’s     1311    said to measure    1640
     Trescow         470                        880
     St. Agnes’      289                        390
     St. Martin’s    230                        720
     Bryher          128                        330
     Sampson          37                        120
                    ――――                       ――――
                    2465                       4080
         The small islands are estimated at     150
                                               ――――
                                               4230

A recent benefit has been given to Scilly by the legislature, in
respect to their police and to the administration of justice. The sole
authority previously existing in the islands resided in a court
possessing very limited power, and that undefined, so that no case of
any magnitude could be acted on in any other way than by sending the
parties over to the main land; an Act of Parliament has now enabled
the executive government to appoint magistrates who may act in Scilly,
without qualification by the possession of freehold property, in as
ample a manner as other justices of the peace may act for the county
at large.

       *     *     *     *     *

St. Agnes Light House. Lat. 50° 18′ 27″. Long. 6° 19′ 23″. In time
25m. 8s. W.

Time of high water at the New and Full Moon, 10 minutes after 4.


     [24] Michi for Mihi, Ducange.――Ed.




APPENDIX.




CONTENTS.

                                                                 Page

     I. Number of acres in each of the Hundreds of Cornwall,
        and the population in 1831                                177

    II. Tables relative to the population of Cornwall, at
        various periods                                           178

   III. List of plants, illustrative of the mild climate of
        Cornwall                                                  180

    IV. Addition to the Parochial History, containing an account
        of the parish of Broadoak                                 184

     V. Observations on an ancient manuscript, entitled Passio
        Christi, written in the Cornish language, and now
        preserved in the Bodleian Library; with an account of the
        language, manners, and customs of the people of Cornwall.
        By William Scawen, Esq. Vice-Warden of the Stannaries.
        (From a manuscript in the library of Thomas Astle, Esq.
        1777.) On the manuscript itself. On the description of
        the Passion contained therein. On the tongue in which the
        Passion is described, and the properties thereof, and how
        it relates to and concerns the people and places of
        Cornwall                                                  190

    VI. Extract from the Itinerary of William of Worcester,
        relative to Cornwall; with a notice of his life and
        character                                                 222

   VII. The Itinerary of John Leland, so far as relates to
        Cornwall                                                  256

  VIII. Extracts from Drayton’s Poly-Olbion, relative to
        Cornwall                                                  293

    IX. On the etymology of names of places within the county.
        Communicated by the late Thomas Hingston, Esq. M.D.       312

     X. Tanner’s Notitia Monastica for Cornwall, from Nasmith’s
        edition. With additions by Sir Henry Ellis, F.R.S. Sec.
        S.A.                                                      319

    XI. Some documents relative to the Priory at Bodmin, from a
        MS. in the British Museum                                 337

   XII. Account of the different Earls of Cornwall; extracted
        from the Baronage of Sir W. Dugdale                       346

  XIII. On the Hundreds of Cornwall. Extracted from Tonkin’s MSS. 375

   XIV. Epitaph of Richard Carew of Antony, Esq. the Historian of
        Cornwall                                                  378

        Index to Carew’s Survey of Cornwall                       381

        Copious Index to the present Work                     393-571




APPENDIX.

I.


The number of acres in each of the hundreds, according to Mr.
Hitchins’s measurement, and the population from the last Parliamentary
Statements, including Voltersholm, and the other small pieces of
Cornwall artificially placed in Devonshire and the Islands of Scilly.

                Acres.              Population.
     Powder    128,115    Penwith     74,867
     East      112,647    Powder      61,911
     Pyder      92,713    Kerrier     56,074
     Penwith    90,957    East        35,086
     Kerrier    89,051    Pyder       25,689
     West       81,558    West        18,254
     Lesnewth   61,132    Trigg       13,057
     Trigg      54,574    Stratton     8,815
     Stratton   48,934    Lesnewth     8,277
               ――――――-               ――――――-
               759,681               302,030
               ――――――-               ――――――-

The three south-western hundreds, Penwith, Kerrier, and Powder contain
nearly two-thirds of the whole population.

And of the two divisions of Cornwall, the East division is in round
numbers about twice as large as the West division, while the West
division has twice the population of the East.




APPENDIX.

II.


The population of Cornwall is given for the years 1700 and 1750, at
105,800 and 135,000; but I know not on what authority. The years 1801,
1811, 1821, and 1831 are from the Parliamentary publications founded
on the actual census on each occasion.

POPULATION OF CORNWALL.

  In 1700 | In 1750 | In 1801 | In 1811 | In 1821 | In 1831
  ――――――- | ――――――- | ――――――- | ――――――- | ――――――- | ――――――-
  105,800 | 135,000 | 194,500 | 216,667 | 257,447 | 301,017

The per-centages of increase taken for 30 years, at the rate between
each interval, are 15¾ per cent., 24 per cent., 38¼ per cent., 67¾ per
cent., and 60 per cent.

  At the rate of increase from 1700 to 1750,
    1000 would become in a century 1628, and would double in 140 years.
  At the rate of increase from 1750 to 1801,
    1000 would become in a century 2046, and would double in 96,8
    years.
  At the rate of increase from 1801 to 1811,
    1000 would become in a century 2943, and would double in 64,2
    years.
  At the rate of increase from 1811 to 1821,
    1000 would become in a century 5610, and would double in 40,2
    years.
  At the rate of increase from 1821 to 1831, 1000 would become in a
    century 4776, and would double in 44,3 years.

The population of Cornwall being in 1831, according to the actual
census, 301,017, if it continued to increase accordingly for a century
at the rate ascertained between 1811 and 1821, the number of people in
1931 would amount to one million six hundred and eighty-eight thousand
six hundred and fifty!

A Table exhibiting the amount to which the population of a thousand
persons would amount in a century, and also the time of its doubling
for each 5 per cent. of increase in 30 years, the period given for
each parish from the Parliamentary Return.

  ――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――+――――――――――――-+――――――――――――
  A thousand, with the following increase,| Will become | Will double
             in thirty years              | in a century|     in
  ――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――――+――――――――――――-+――――――――――――
  5 per cent. increase in thirty years    |     1176    | 426 years.
  10 per cent.                            |     1374    | 218
  15 per cent.                            |     1593    | 148
  20 per cent.                            |     1836    | 114
  25 per cent.                            |     2104    |  93,2
  30 per cent.                            |     2398    |  79,2
  35 per cent.                            |     2719    |  69,3
  40 per cent.                            |     3070    |  61,8
  45 per cent.                            |     3451    |  56
  50 per cent.                            |     3863    |  51,3
  55 per cent.                            |     4310    |  47,4
  60 per cent.                            |     4791    |  44,2
  65 per cent.                            |     5308    |  41,5
  70 per cent.                            |     5874    |  39,2
  75 per cent.                            |     6458    |  37,2
  80 per cent.                            |     7094    |  35,4
  85 per cent.                            |     7773    |  33,8
  90 per cent.                            |     8495    |  32,4
  95 per cent.                            |     9264    |  31,1
  100 per cent.                           |    10080    |  30




APPENDIX.

III.


The Editor has been favoured with the following list of plants
illustrative of the mild climate of Cornwall.


The native plant of greatest curiosity is the Erica Vagans, Erica
Didima of Withering, Erica Multiflora of Ray and Hudson. This plant
spreads over the whole serpentine formation of the Lizard, and
observes its limits almost to a foot. It is said to appear again at
Clickitor near Liskeard, where the serpentine formation is also found.

The Ligusticum Cornubiense, remarkable only from its extreme rarity,
grows near Bodmin, in a place called Margaret’s Wood.

The Tamarix Gallica grows in great abundance about the Lizard,
apparently wild, but it is said to have been brought there from St.
Michael’s Mount in the early part of the last century; and St.
Michael’s Mount having been long a cell to Mount St. Michael in
Normandy, the shrub may very probably have been introduced by the
monks. It powerfully resists the sea winds, and grows freely on the
banks of earth or sand surrounding inclosures near the shore. The wood
is so solid as to sink in water.

The Panicum Dactylon grows on the bank of gravel lying between the
sea, and the road leading from Marazion to Penzance.

The Sibthorpia Europæa may be found in great plenty about half a mile
inland from thence, in a stream flowing westward by the road near
Gulval church town. This plant was named by Linnæus in honour of
Humphry Sibthorpe, M.D. Professor of Botany at Oxford from 1747 to
1784. The hybrid variety or monstrosity of the Antirrhinum Linaria,
called Peloria, is said to grow at the foot of Mabe Hill on the old
road leading from Helston to Penryn. The Erica Ciliaris has recently
been found at Carclew, near Penryn, the seat of Sir Charles Lemon,
M.P. for the county.

And many of the cryptogamia flourish in a degree unknown in other
countries, among which the magnificent Osmunda Regalis may be selected
as a specimen.


  A List of Plants that are growing in the open air at Pendarves, most
    of which have stood several years without protection.

  Agapanthus umbellatus, many years.
  Aristolochia sempervirens, two years.
  Anthyllis Hermannia, three or four years.
  Alvysoa citra odora, several years.
  Acacia armata, two years.
  Aster argophyllus, four years.
  Benthamia pasifera, one year.
  Bocconia cordata, several years.
  Bouvardia triphylla, three or four years.
  Bignonia grandiflora, three years.
  Brugmansia suaveolens (datura arborea,) two years.
  Calceolaria, five or six species.
  Coronilla glauca and valentina, several years.
  Calendula tragus, several years.
  Cineraria populifolia, several years.
  Chrysocoma cernua aurea, several years.
  Collectia spinosa (from Chili), two years.
  Canna indica and bicolor, two years.
  Camellia Japonica, several varieties, two years.
  Capraria lanceolata, two years.
  Cobœa scandens, two years.
  Charlwoodia australis (Dracæna australis) covered in
    frosty nights last winter with a mat, and is now growing very
    strong, and is nearly six feet high.
  Clethra arborea, three or four years.
  Daphne odora, five or six years.
  Dolichos lignosus, two years.
  Duvaura undulata and dependens, one and two years.
  Encomus punctata, several years.
  Eriocephalus africanus, five or six years.
  Ericomus fragrans, two years.
  Eriobotrya japonica (loquat), three or four years.
  Echium grandiflorum and glaucophyllum, three or four years.
  Echium nervosum, stem six inches diameter, five feet four inches
    high, twenty-five feet in circumference, and from thirty to forty
    spikes of flowers.
  Edwardsia grandiflora, one year.
  ―――― microphylla, two years.
  Escallonia rubra and montividiensis, two years.
  Fuschia gracilis, nine feet six inches high, circumference forty
    feet, diameter thirteen feet ten inches.
  Fuschia conica, globosa, coccinea, maxima, apetela, adolphina,
    robertsia, virgata, &c.
  Gazania rigens, two years.
  Globularia longifolia, two years.
  Gnaphalium ericoides, stœchas, fetidum, four years.
  Geranium, many varieties, four years.
  Hippia frutescens, three or four years.
  Heliotropium corymbosum, two years.
  Hoya carnosa, two years.
  Hypericum monogynum, several years.
  Hydrangea hortensis, six feet six inches high, circumference
    forty-five feet.
  Justicia adatoda, two years.
  Jasminum revolutum, ten or twelve years.
  Lobelia crinus (rock work), three or four years.
  Lithospermum erubescens, two years.
  Leonitus leonurus, eight feet high, spreading eighteen feet on a low
    wall, three or four years.
  Melaleuca hypericifolia, five or six years.
  Maurandia Barclayana and semperflorens, two years.
  Melianthus major and coccineus, several years.
  Oxalis, several species.
  Othonna pectinata, two or three years.
  Ornithogalum longibracteatum, two years.
  Psoralea spicata, pinnata, and aculeata.
  Petunia nyctaginiflora, and phœnicia, two years.
  Passiflora cœrulea racemosa, two years.
  Richardia Æthiopica (Calla), many years.
  Salvia cardinalis, grahami, involucrata, &c.
  Saxifraga sarmentosa, several years.
  Thunbergia coccinea (on a wall), three years.
  Tradescantia crassula, three years.
  Teucrium latifolia and frutescens, three years.
  Vergilia Capensis, seven feet three inches high, diameter five feet,
    two years.
  Vestia lycioides, eight feet high, three years.
  Verbena chamoidryoides and pulchella, two years.
  Polygala speciosa and myrtifolia, three or four years.
  Olea fragrans, ten to twelve years (south wall).
  Physalis edulis, three or four years.
  Diosma ericoides, three to four years.

       *     *     *     *     *

The Acacia lophantha, dealbata, and several other plants, have been
planted out during the last spring, and will probably stand out the
winter as well as the above.




APPENDIX.

IV.


Since the parish of Broadoak was printed, an additional sheet of Mr.
Hals’s manuscript has been communicated to the Editor by his friend
the Rev. Richard Polwhele. It contains an account of the important
military events which distinguished that parish and the neighbourhood,
in 1644, and it is therefore printed as a curious addition to what has
here been given in the body of the work, on the same subject. Mr.
Polwhele has also sent another sheet relative to St. Stephen’s near
Saltash, but that does not contain anything of the least importance.

These two sheets appear to have been separated from the work at Exeter
by the carelessness of the bookseller in whose hands the whole had
been lodged, and this confirms the suspicion of more important losses
having taken place at the same time.


BROADOAK.

Broadoak is situate in the hundred of West, and hath upon the south
Boconnock, west St. Winnow, east St. Pynock, north Cardinham; and by
the name of Bradock it was taxed in Domesday Roll, 20 William I. 1087;
which word, if it be single, signifies a rebel or traitor, one that
betrays the trust and fidelity reposed in him by another; otherwise if
it be commonly understood of Brad-ock or Brodock, it signifies broad
trees of oak (Saxon).

In the Pope’s Inquisition into the value of Benefices before-mentioned,
1294, Capella de Bradock in decanatu de Westwellshire, appropriata
Domui de Lanceston, was valued at xiii_s._ iv_d._ from whence it
appears the church was endowed by the college of St. Stephen’s or
Lanceston; in Wolsey’s Inquisition or Valor Beneficiorum at £8. 13_s._
4_d._; the patronage in the Bishop of Exon, the incumbent Pearce, the
rectory in possession of ――――; and this parish was rated to the 4_s._
per pound Land Tax for one year, 1696, £57.

Here let it be remembered that Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, General
of the Parliament Army, being in Devon, received orders from his
masters, 1644, to march from thence with the same towards Plymouth, in
order to raise the siege thereof, it being then greatly distressed by
Sir Richard Grenville, as was the west part of that county, who
immediately set forward with his army, and marched on towards that
place; yet not so quickly but that Grenville had notice of his motion,
and, fearing he was not strong enough to engage his great army, he by
night privately dislodged from the siege of Plymouth with his own
regiment, Colonel Fortescue’s, Colonel Carew’s, and Colonel Acland’s;
and the better to shun or avoid his enemy, marching down by way of
Plympton, he turned aside towards St. Botolph’s and Saltash Passage,
where with boats he passed over his troops, and so entered over the
Tamar river into Cornwall; which Essex understanding as soon as he
came to Plymouth, having thus raised the siege and relieved the town,
forthwith marched after Grenville as far as Lestwithell and Bradoak
Downs, himself quartering at Lanhydrock, the Lord Robartes’s house,
and sending out troops of horse westwards if possible to attack him.
In the mean time, King Charles I. being then in Somerset with his
army, and having notice of those facts of Essex’s, forthwith marched
out of Somerset through Devon with his army for Grenville’s relief,
and entered Cornwall by way of Polston bridge, the 11th of August
1644; from thence advanced to Lanceston, and so directly to Liskeard,
which place for some time he made his head quarters, where the
townsmen and contiguous countrymen shewed themselves very zealous and
loyal towards his service, especially for that the town or borough and
manor of Leskeard was his son the Duke of Cornwall’s lands, in right
of his Duchy of Cornwall.

Soon after which the country people gave private notice to the King,
that on a certain day the quarter-master, General Dalbier,
Lieutenant-Colonel Charleton, Colonel Allured, Colonel Barkley, and
some other officers of Essex’s army were to dine at the Lord Mohun’s
house, not far from Lestwithell.

At the day appointed the King dispatched a party of horse, and by
surprise took them all prisoners (except Dalbier, who made his escape)
and brought them all prisoners to Leskeard, where soon after Prince
Rupert arrived at the King’s army, which gave great hopes of a notable
victory over Essex; and, in order to give him battle, the King soon
after drew forth his army from Leskeard, and marched west to Bradock
Downs in this parish, opposite to St. Winnow and Boconnock Downs,
where Essex lay encamped, on the east side of Lestwithell town, and
there pitched his camp and standard, he himself, Prince Rupert, and
Grenville quartering at the Lord Mohun’s house; from whence he sent a
letter August 16th, as he had sent another before from Leskeard by the
Lord Beauchamp’s nephew, to Essex, for a treaty of peace, to which he
received no answer; then he sent another letter to him in the name of
the officers of his army, to which Essex sent a negative answer
directed to the Earl of Forth, purporting that he had received a
letter from his lordship, and other commanders of the King’s army, by
which a treaty with him was desired for a general peace, which he
could not admit of without a breach of the trust reposed in him by the
Parliament, having no power by his commission to treat in a matter of
such importance.

Whereupon happened several skirmishes between the cavaliers and
parliament troops; and in particular that challenge and sharp charge
between Colonel Straughan’s for the Parliament and Colonel Digby’s for
the King, was most remarkable. Straughan’s troop consisted of a
hundred young men from sixteen to twenty years of age, on whose faces,
as was said, never razor had past in order to shave their beards, all
double, if not treble armed for this encounter. This troop of
Straughan’s was led forth by himself on Bradock and St. Winnow Downs,
having nothing on his head but a hat, and on the trunk of his body
nought but a white linen shift, where they braved it for some time
as was said before, giving defiance to a like number of the King’s
party in sight of the King and both armies; whereupon soon after
dislodged the Lord Digby’s troop for the King, to accept and fight
this challenge of Straughan’s, who with great resolution and bravery
advanced towards him, and gave the first onset or charge, but firing
their pistols at too great distance, it did little harm to his
adversary, whilst instantly Straughan, like a firebrand of hell, with
a led horse by his side, had before commanded his boys, as he called
them, to take their adversary’s fire, which they then did with
unspeakable hardiness, and rushed on to the very horse heads of
Digby’s troopers, that before had spent their shot, himself leading
the fore front to the very points of their swords, when he discharged
his double-barrelled pistols, and was in like manner seconded by his
troopers, who had all the same sort of pistols, and most of them laden
with three or four bullets each, which proved so fatal and disastrous
a blow to Digby’s troopers, that the one half of them were slain on
the spot or mortally wounded; and it was further observable, that
scarce horse or man that escaped went not off without some hurt or
damage, as I was told by one Mr. William Maye, a gentleman that was
one of Digby’s troop, and sorely wounded in this battle, the marks of
which through his hands, arms, and legs were visible, though cured to
a large degree, till his dying day, 1672; and much the like account I
had of this battle or combat from Mr. William Upcott, of Truro, and
Mr. Joseph Upcott, of Morval, brothers, that were parcel of
Straughan’s troop, who there took some of the King’s horses alive,
their riders being slain, upon whose furniture was his proper arms,
the star and the letters C. R.

But, alas! notwithstanding this success of Straughan’s troop, the King
with his army had so hemmed in or surrounded Essex in his head
quarters at Lestwithell, that he could not long subsist or have relief
for his soldiers, for the Lord Goring and Sir Thomas Basset, Knt.
stopped all provision with a great body of horse, that was coming to
him by way of St. Blazey from the west, as Sir Richard Grenville did
the like by way of St. Colomb, Bodmin, and Lanhydrock from the north;
whereupon it was resolved by Essex’s council, that he should desert
his army, and privately by night in a boat go down the river to
Fowey, and from thence take ship for Plymouth, which expedient was
accordingly put in execution, and the General Essex, the Lord
Robartes, and some others the next day got into Plymouth, being the
31st of August 1644. On the same day Sir William Balfour with two
thousand five hundred of the Parliament horse, with divers officers,
viz. Colonel Nicholas Boscawen, his Lieutenant-Colonel James Hals, of
Merther, Henry Courtenay, of St. Bennet’s in Lanyvet, Colonel John
Seyntaubyn, of Clowans, and his Lieutenant Colonel Braddon, Colonel
Carter, and several other officers and gentlemen of quality, early in
the morning forced their passage over St. Winnow, Boconnock, and
Bradock Downs, though the body of the King’s army, which lay encamped
on the heath in those places, maugre all opposition to the contrary;
from thence they rode to Leskeard, from thence to Saltash Passage, and
from thence to Plymouth safely the same day, amidst their own garrison
and confederates.

Notwithstanding this desertion of the general and other officers as
aforesaid, Major General Skippon (a Londoner), like a good commander,
resolved to live and die with his soldiers; and in order to their
preservation, being at least twelve thousand men, he led them down the
banks of the river on the west side thereof towards Foye, in order to
transport them over the passage or river to Lanteglos, or ship them
from thence for Plymouth, all other roads and high ways being stopped
up by the King’s army as aforesaid, during which march Skippon’s men
were sorely distressed in the rear by the King’s soldiers, so that
five of their field pieces were taken in the lanes, whereupon the next
morning his men made a stand, and with a brigade of horse that never
deserted the infantry, charged the King’s troops with great courage
and animosity, and beat them out of the field which they had lost the
day before, with some loss; whereupon immediately the King sent
Captain Brett with the Queen’s troop to attack them, who in the King’s
sight charged Skippon’s brigade with that fury and violence as forced
them to retire from the field aforesaid, whereby not only he regained
the ground that was lost, but got some other fields from his party,
and then returned in good order, having lost only four men, himself
being shot in the arm, for which brave adventure the King knighted him
on the spot. After which the Parliament soldiers were so dispirited
that they could hardly be brought to stand to their arms; upon which
dismay Colonel Butler and a trumpeter came to desire a parley with the
King, which was forthwith granted, and a treaty followed on the first
of September, when the Commissioners on the King’s part were Prince
Maurice and the Earl of Bramford, for Essex’s soldiers Major-General
Philip Skippon, Colonel Christopher Whichcott, and others, by whom a
cessation of hostility was agreed upon in these terms――




APPENDIX.

V.

  _Observations on an Ancient Manuscript, entitled Passio Christi,
     written in the Cornish Language, and now preserved in the
     Bodleian Library; with an account of the Language, Manners, and
     Customs of the People of Cornwall. By William Scawen, Esq.
     Vice-Warden of the Stannaries._ (_From a Manuscript in the
     Library of Thomas Astle, Esq. 1777._)

  _On the Manuscript itself. On the description of the Passion
     contained therein. On the tongue in which the Passion is
     described, and the properties thereof, and how it relates to and
     concerns the people and places of Cornwall._


CONCERNING the manuscript itself, (which is the ground of the
fabric) the first thing that presents itself is the outside, which is
not polished, but in a homely, humble simplicity, and written upon a
rough old vellum, which may be supposed to be before parchments here
came much into use; and by the rude pictures set out therewith, it may
seem to be before the art of painting became better amongst us.

Next to behold the chirography thereof, written in no other than the
old Court Hand, not of the best form, but seeming somewhat older than
we find it in other places, and some of the letters and characters
different from the common Court Hand.

As to the speech itself, it is such as the common speakers of the
Cornish now used here do not understand, nor any but such as will be
at the pains to study it, no more than the common speakers of the
vulgar nation of the Greeks do at this day Homer’s Iliad. So the
Lord’s Prayer in the year 700 was thus in English: Vren fader thic
arth, &c. In 900, Thu ure fader the eart on heofenum.

As to the antiquity thereof, we observe the name of our Saviour is all
along written IHS, after the old form used in crucifixes, and then
also the name written Chrest, not Christ. So we find it written in
Tacitus, Suetonius, and in some other Roman authors it may be found.
So Christians were called Chrestians, as Tertullian observes, Apol. c.
3.[25] And so the vulgar in Cornish speak it Chrest, and not Christ.

In this old piece are no words antiently intermixed of the Saxon
tongue or Angles, which shews, in all probability, that it was written
before their time at least, if not much further off; whereas, the
common speech of it now carries much of those latter figures, to the
disfiguring of the face thereof. But of all other intermixion, it
seems to receive in it (with a kind of delight) the tongue of the
Romans, by whom the people were easily brought to take up that tongue
which they brought with them, and afterwards more and more by degrees
in succeeding times, the Roman speech was interwoven with the Cornish,
out of a natural propensity to it, as that tongue came to be used of
all other nations afterwards, as was observed before.

Another argument there is (and that which is to be admired and
rejoiced at) that in this old piece of the Passion, there is nothing
heretical, little of error to be found, or savouring of ill opinions;
which is strange, since it has passed through so many ages, in which
so many ill broods have been hatched, and, amongst others, one of our
own, the Pelagian heresy, a brat bred here amongst us at Bangor. Nor
is there any mention made of any monastical persons, or several orders
of men so living. Nothing that refers to Monks, Friars, Priors, or to
any other orders, secular or sacred, nor any thing said in approbation
or dislike of any such thing.

There is nothing in it savouring of the old bards or their poetry, nor
having references to Merlyanisms, but a bare and sober relation of
matter of fact.


II. As to the description of the Passion and Resurrection of our
Saviour, I cannot again but admire, that it is so unpolluted with the
Arian or Pelagian heresies. There are, it is true, some inoffensive
and harmless traditions, and a word may be let slip of the Virgin
Mary; and in those traditions you may observe the concurrence of
others.

And, first, concerning this Longis: it is to be inquired whether he be
not that Longinus mentioned in our Calendar on the fifteenth of March,
or that Longinus on the first of December; for of Longinus there is
the same history to be found in Picinellus his Mundus Symbolicus;[26]
whose words are, D. P. Comestor ad Longinum vitiosos et caligantes
fuisse oculos, cum vero fluentem in Christi latere sanguinem casu
illis admovisset, videndi acumen recepisse. In eandem Septentiam canit
S. G. Nazian-zenus.[27]

     Ubi fixit hastam, defluentis sanguinis
     Tinctam liquore, et ecce! ut utraque manu
     Hausit, oculosque hoc ungit hinc ut scilicet
     Detergat oculum nocte, que cera legit, &c.

     When into Christ he thrust his tainted spear,
     Lo! unto both his hands the blood flow’d there,
     Wherewith he anoints his eyes and then saw clear,
     Which like the night till that time blinded were.

Mr. Lassells, in his Voyages into Italy, tells us, that the picture of
Longinus stands under the top of the spear with which Christ’s side
was pierced, in the cupola at St. Peter’s church at Rome. It may be
conjectured, that this tradition owes its origin to the literal sense
of that prophecy; “they should look on him whom they had pierced.”

For the wood of the cross, (another of the traditions,) Genebrard’s
account thereof, as reported by Purchas in his Pilgrimage, p. 30,
comes somewhat near it, which is, that Seth went to the Cherub which
kept Paradise, and received three grains of the Tree of Life, whereof
we read in the Apocalypse, “The leaves shall heal the nation.” With
these three grains was an oil made, wherewith Adam was anointed, and
the stones put into his mouth, whence sprang the tree whereof the
cross of our Lord was made, hidden by Solomon in the Temple, and
after in the pool of Bethesda; according to which, in a church window
at St. Neot’s, is one pictured putting something under another’s
tongue, with this inscription, Hic Seth ponit tria grana sub lingua
Adæ. If any list to see further about the timber whereof the cross was
made, let him read Mr, Evelyn’s Sylva, c. 3, Num. 17. As to that of
the smith’s wife, in forming the nails for the crucifixion, perhaps
they might think, that as the first woman had the first hand in the
transgression, so a woman must be employed in the last act of this
tragedy. We may observe,

1. What true and manifest notions these antient people had, and
faithfully retained, of the Trinity, and the reverence they gave them.

2. How distinctly and clearly they did set forth, in those dark days
they lived in, the several distinct attributes of the Deity, assigning
power to the Father, wisdom to the Son, goodness to the blessed
Spirit.

4. How well they agree and adhere to the doctrine of the true church
of Christ, in the points maintained by us concerning the loss and fall
of man and mankind, and the restoration of him, and concerning the
eternal decree and purpose of God, in the salvation of man,
notwithstanding his fall.

We may observe by the Resurrection, thus shortly declared as it is,
that it appears plainly that those people were not Nullyfidians.

Nor were they Solyfidians.

They placed the foundation of their happiness in belief.

And the superstruction thereupon in good works.

Lastly, we cannot think they were any way inclinable to the minds of
those scoffers at the day of judgment, which St. Peter meets with in
his second Epistle, 2, 9, and 10. Our people acknowledged, that at the
Great Day of account a punishment shall be upon the wicked, and a
glory expected to be given to the godly. Thus far as a taste only of
what is contained therein.

III. On the tongue in which the Passion of our Saviour is thus
described, we have, among other things, such as these observables:

     1. The Idiom.
     2. The Innocency and Cleanness.
     3. The Wisdom.
     4. Significances of it.

1. For the Idioms. They put the substantive before the adjunct or
adjective. 2. The preposition sometimes comes after the noun. 3. It is
usual to change a letter in the beginning, middle, or end of a word or
syllable, and sometimes to omit in each for sound sake. 4. They
contract several words into one for sound sake, and that very short
also; with many other changes, of which it is hard to know or find any
certain rule now, but some may be made out upon reading, due
observation and experience had on this that follows; and for the
pronunciation, the Cornish is not to be gutturally pronounced as the
Welsh for the most part is, nor mutteringly as the Armorick, nor
whiningly as the Irish (which two latter qualities seem to have been
contracted from their servitudes), but must be lively and manly
spoken, like other primitive tongues.

2. For the Innocency of it. What is most remarkable is, that it hath a
most excellent defective qualification in it, peculiar to itself; for,
whereas all other tongues abound in execrable oaths, the old Cornish
have none at all, not so much as reproachful terms. The word that
comes nearest to an oath with them is Areire, Areiaree, which is Mary,
Mary, spoken by way of wonder. The next good defective qualification
is, that there are no great titles in it, which Nutricule Tyrannidis.

3. For the Wisdom, Proverbs (which contain usually the wisdom of a
nation) they have had, but we cannot find them in any great plenty.
Yet some there are worthy observing, as these:

     Cows nebas, cows da, nebas an yeveren an gevella.
     Speak little, speak well, little of public matter is best.

     Cows nebas, cows da, hada veth cowsas arta.
     Speak little, speak well, and well will be spoken again.

     Taw Tavas.
     Be silent tongue.――To call one Tavas Tavas, Tongue Tongue, is as
       great a reproach as you can put upon any one.

     Reys yw meeras dueth ken lemmell uneth.
     Look twice before you leap once.

     Neb na gare y gwayn coll restewa.
     He that loves not gain loss befall him.

     Neb na gare y gy an gwra deveeder.
     He that loves not his dog will make him a choaked sheep.

     Non ges goon heb lagas na kei hebs scovern.
     There is no down without eye, nor hedge without ears.

     Na reys gara anvor goth ragan vor noweth.
     Do not leave the way old for the way new.

     Guel gw gwetha vel goofen.
     Better keep than ask.――This is spoken of a wariness and
       precaution concerning lending.

     Grova da rag, tha hannen te yn gurd.
     Do good, for thyself thou dost it.

4. Significancy of the Tongue. Adam gave names to the creatures,
according to their natures; but the people of this land, having no
better guide, have given names upon long experience had, and much
observation made of the nature of things, and those do mostly appear
now as to places and families. I shall adventure upon some instances:

Lanceston, alias Dunhevet. Camden would fain have it to be Fanum
Stephani; indeed St. Stephen’s, which is a mile off, seems to be the
mother church, Lanceston the daughter church. Others would have it to
be Lancelot’s Town, one of the Champion Knights of King Arthur, but
that is further from truth. The Chief Justice Foster, talking with me
about it, would fain have Dunhevet to be the most ancient name, from
Dune a town, and Hevet above it, which there is accordingly. I told
his lordship we must fetch the derivation higher, from the Cornish
original (and not from the Saxon), and that is Leostofen, which is a
place of large extent, or a broad end, which is properly so according
to the situation thereof, at the broad end of the county, from whence
it grows towards the west still narrower, like to the point of a
wedge. I read in a good author, that Radulphus, brother to Alfius,
Duke of Cornwall, was founder of Lanceston. I think he means the
castle there, not the town.

The names of places above, and from those places downwards, have
suffered much violence along the river from Devon side, by reason of
the mutations formerly spoken of; but from thence we shall take notice
of some that have received their names antiently, passing down the
river of Tamar (and on some of the branches thereof) where, by the
way, I may say I am astonished at some of our late Geographers, who,
in enumerating the famous bridges in all this have omitted altogether
ours in Cornwall, of which, among land, other lesser, we have three
that are very eminent, one of which, Wadebridge, stands further west;
the two others, besides many smaller, are on the river of Tamar; one
Horsbridge, the other called Newbridge. But much more I wonder at
their omission among the rivers of the famous river of Tamar, a river,
after the Thames, not behind any of note in this kingdom, which I
mention the sooner, because it is most properly ours in Cornwall; for
though it be great and very navigable far up, yet it arises in and
floats only in this little county of Cornwall, and its whole course
contains within the same, and it is the boundary thereof from other
parts, wherein other streams do flow, Linnar, Fiddy, &c. and before it
falls into the Estuarium, where it gives entertainment from Devon on
the other side to Tavy, Plym, Yeom, and others, where they all lose
their names in Tamar. And I do much more wonder that it should be
printed by some others, that this famous river should fall into the
sea near the Land’s End, whereas this alone possesses the whole
honourable harbour of Plymouth (more than sixty miles distant from the
Land’s End), and stands appropriated to the interest of Cornwall,
belonging to the Duke thereof, the Prince of Wales. And to return to
what I said last, in coming down from this broad end of the county to
that famous harbour, though our next bordering neighbour Devonshire
and the saints, have stolen away from us many of the antient British
names, and intruded upon us many strange ones, yet some left us here
and there of the antient speech all along, upon the river and the
branches thereof, which I am obliged to memorize.

Lawhit, in Glamorganshire, is said to be Fanum Iltuti, to which the
Ton being added in Cornish, makes it up. Iltutus was an ancient
British Monk in King Arthur’s time. Landue may be the church or chapel
of St. David, though Landuan in Cornish is the black church or chapel.
And for Lezant, that is the holy saint, meaning St. Michael, to whom
that church was dedicated.

As Cargreene, which is a rock in the gravel standing in a green place.
Carbeele or Carbilly, a rock mentulæ formæ. Carkeele of the same
signification.

Landulph, where St. Dulpho is memorized by the church’s name, and the
well there so called St. Dulpho’s well. Halton, i. e. Haelton, a green
place near the water.

Pillaton, a round or clue by a green.

Larrake I did formerly suppose to have been from Laun or Lun, which is
usually set for a church or chapel; but on better consideration I
think otherwise of it now, because I find several other places
hereabouts written Larrake, which have no reference to church; and
because the manor antiently was written and called Larrake, which is
antienter than the church, and it signifies a place of content in
Cornish.[28]

Blerrake I take to be of the same signification too; a little from
which latter place, if content may be had from a prospect, it is there
in my opinion. A place formerly called Ballahow, now the fairest and
amplest I know any where, excepting such as are dignified by the sight
of a metropolis, or such places of eminency, though it stands not on a
promontory, and but a little from the sea in a plain, though but a
rough one, and from it you may look directly into the sea, as far as
human eye-sight can enable you.

Towards the sea-shore on the one side, you have in eye the Start in
Devon, and westward the Lizard, for your boundaries. Towards the land
northward, the wild moors of Devon, called the East Moors, and the
other side the West Moors in Cornwall. Between those you may observe
the vale countries of both, two rich valleys, one in Devon side, and
the other in Cornwall, and take the sight of Tamar as their
boundaries, and you will wonder, looking at it from above, to know how
to think that river should find a way through those countries to the
sea, especially if you consider that you seldom see water in those
tracts of land by which it passes, yet you see also as it passes
Plymouth the royal citadel, Plymton, Millbrooke, and abundance of
small villages and boroughs in a country on each side pleasant, and
the whole prospect not obscured by hills, or any thing else by which
you may be hindered from the sun in any part of the day; besides this
overlooks the Eddy-rock or stone, a dreadful place about a league out
in the sea, where many hundred of ships have been wrecked, being in
the trade way to the harbour from the west; yet I have heard some
antient skilful mariners to aver, that if a good artist should go
about to strike on this rock purposely, he would not be able to do it,
so far doth chance go beyond art.

Cuttenbrake is a concealed head, and E. Trematon, a place on three
hills.

Inesworth, which is Ineswartha, the island above, or the higher
island, in respect to the situation of the island of St. Nicholas
below, where the saint hath gotten the mastery again.

Ints or Ince, which is a proper name for an island, though this be
joined, as Insworth is, by a short neck to other parts of the parish
of St. Stephen’s. Here passing, we come by the mouth of the river to
Pembernose, which is in Cornish the head of the night, or midnight, as
if it were said that there is safe coming in there at any time; and
from thence we pass to the uttermost point westward, called Penlee,
which is the headland to the leeward; and so sailing along by the sea
side to the two Gayers, the East and West Gayers near Ramehead, which
may give nomination to families of that name in the west, which are
now worn out there, and have had a good recruit in Plymouth, and from
thence a better in London, by a late Lord Mayor, there so called, but
taking his descent from Cornish original, according to the word.

Rame is a long ridge of rocks, and here called Ramehead, because it is
so formed towards the sea like a ram’s horn, which hath turnings in it
to put mariners in mind thereof: in Cornish Pendenhar. Sailing along
from thence by the sea side, we come to Millan Dreth, that is, a mill
on the sea sand at Loo,[29] or Lough, which is a common name with most
nations for a low or watery place, and so Port-Loo, and Port-pinnion,
the little port, nigh to which also is Denloe, or Delough; and
stepping a little from thence in the land, is Minhinnitt, which is a
hill on a highway, and so indeed it is rightly styled; and the well of
St. Lollo, and the foot of Liskeard. Near to it is Liskeard (a near
neighbour thereto), some say a place affected; others take it from the
Cornish word Leskeveres, like length, like breadth, a square, so it
anciently was, and so fortified, as the castle walls yet in part
remaining show. Some would not have us go so far back, but would have
us take it from a physician so named, and a miracle supposed to be
wrought by him there, and this may be right also; but then we must
suppose that to be St. Luke the physician, and some ground there is
for that also, for the most antient street thereof is to this day
called St. Luke’s street. Luke’s Day also is their day of feasting,
and for choice of their Governor. This agrees well enough with the
former as the fortification of it; and towards the sea again we come
to Lestwithiel. Some hold that to be lion’s tail or lion’s train;
others take it to be ‘enough together.’ The place, though now grown
much in decay, hath formerly been held the only shire town, and where
the Knights of the Shire have been still chosen, and the Convocation
of the Stanneries held, &c. A great hall was lately there, which was
used for those purposes in my knowledge, belonging to the Dukes of
Cornwall, who did the like when under them; and here also they kept
their court and residence, near to which stands yet their castle
Restormell, in Cornish a bellyfull of money, a place of honey; besides
which the Dukes had seven others, Liskeard, Tintagell, Lanceston, and
Trematon, which is in Cornish three hills on a green top, though that
came to the Crown by attainder. As for the river Vz or Vzell, which
some speak of, I suppose is a mistake; the river there is the river of
Fowey, in Cornish Foath, which hath its head spring in the moors above
it, Venton Foath, in English called Foycombwell and Aqua de Fowey. As
it comes further down near Foath, is a town or place called
Tywardreth, in Cornish, a town on the sand, or above the sand, which
agrees well with its situation, where heretofore there stood a priory,
the buildings whereof are now decayed. I may not forget as next to
Foath the town of Polruan, which is now a small village of fishing,
but heretofore famous, standing on the top of an ancient hill, where
are the ruins of a spacious fair church, called yet by the name of St.
Saviour’s, Polruan is in Cornish, a frosty bottom, or frosty pool,
this being seated over against Foath; between those two towns
heretofore there went athwart the river a chain of iron from a small
castle on each side, for their security against foreigners by sea, but
by their neglect of preserving it in time of peace, was stolen away
from them by some boats that came from Dartmouth in Devon, and carried
there, where the river is of equal breadth, and the harbour is much
like that of Fowey, and hath over against the town of Dartmouth a
little town called King’s Way, which answers to Polruan against Fowey.
The Fowey men have attempted the restitution of their chain, but never
could obtain it, because they had been so careless, it being the means
of their own preservation formerly. Between these two neighbouring
towns of Fowey and Polruan, standing one against the other, in the
harbour between them, there used to be antiently a solemn contention
of justing performed upon the river every May-day, upon two boats
singled out of equal strength, from the one side and from the other,
to encounter each other upon the water, there being a stage made on
each of them, upon the end of the boat, for the several champions to
stand on. Several boats were to row with six oars a-piece, rowing
fiercely against one another. The champions were arrayed only in
white, slightly but better armed about the breast and neck, and
holding a lance rebated in the form of an oar (according to their
trade); but a fierce attempt they make upon each other, and one or
both of them is usually carried by the push to sound the depth of the
harbour, and then a new supply of others for fresh encounter is called
for again.

This I have seen to be performed in my time, and it usually drew
abundance of people together to behold the sport from the hills on
both sides, and from the town, with many others, with boats likewise
upon the river, and not without need, to receive up and recover their
dejected champions, who end their encounters in peace, not without
liquor, the element of their contention.

Mevagissy, or Mevagissey, a hill to keep mares in.

Penwarn, a head beloved.

Bodrigan, a hill by the ebbing of the sea.

Dudman or Gubman, a place where much ore is cast in.

This spot of land called Bodrigan, a spacious fair barton looking
towards the sea, was not very long since possessed by gentry of the
same name, whose estate was great; and being forfeited to King Henry
the Seventh, part thereof was given to Trevanion, a noble family of
this county; but this Bodrigan, with many other lands, to Edgcombe,
that Sir Richard Edgcombe, of whom let me deliver my judgment, that he
was a witty, valiant, wise, good man, and a good commonwealth’s man.
Witty, as appears by his hiding himself and throwing his cap and coat
away for his preservation, O quantum est subditis casibus ingenium.
Valiant, in that he was made a Knight Banneret at Bosworth field.
Wise, in that he was made choice of for one of the Commissioners for
the happy treaty of marriage of Margaret, the King’s eldest daughter,
with James the Fourth, King of Scots, a happiness to the kingdom at
this day. A good man, and not a pilferer of the people (as many were
in those days); otherwise he would be named in Perkin Warbeck’s
Declaration, set down by Chancellor Bacon. A good commonwealth’s man,
as appears by that stately and costly fabric of Newbridge built by
him.

Peale, a spire, lies to the north of Tolpenwith a mile, and it is the
true Land’s-end. This spire, called the Pele, stood on a little
island; between it and the shore there is room for a boat to pass with
oars; the spire was ten fathom or more above the ordinary flux of the
sea, very narrow on the top, hardly room for a man to sit on it; in
the floor it was and is fourteen feet square. In the year before King
Charles the First was beheaded, it was prodigiously cut off in the
floor by a storm, and falling broke in three pieces.

Herles, truly interpreted Hercules’ Pillars, are a ridge of rocks a
quarter of a mile in length, standing like pillars divided into small
islands, and distant from the Pele a mile. From these by the north
coast we come to St. Ives, in Cornish Port Eer of Geer, a port with a
pool. Paddestow, so called by Saxon Angles, being Patherickstow.
Another place near by, called Little Petherick, which partakes not of
the Cornish at all; for in the Cornish it is Lethanneck, a place of
much sea-sand, which agrees well with the site, much sea and much sand
there is driven. A little above which is the house of Edmund Prideaux,
esq. my kinsman, now called Place, formerly Guarandre, or Warthantre,
i. e. above the town or above the sand; but that we may do right to
latter times also, we find much mention to be made also of
Patrickstow, and that St. Patrick, after much time spent in Ireland,
and endowments of learning by long study were obtained, he came into
Cornwall, and built a monastery there not far from the river of
Severn, which comes home to that which is said by Archbishop Usher, as
also to the name of the place. Locus ubi Petrocus consedit in
Cornubia, Petrocstow, hodie Padstow nominatur, prius Laffeneck. Antiq.
p. 292; and after thirty years went to Rome, &c. By other authors it
is said, that at Bodmyn his body was buried but stolen from thence,
and carried by one Martinus to the abbey of Menevy or Mein, in Little
Britany; but upon complaint to the king it was restored, and brought
back undiminished to the Prior of Bodmyn. b. §. p. 293. But whether
this were to be understood of St. Patrick, the apostle of Ireland, it
is altogether to be doubted, since as to the burial of his body there
hath been so much contention that that should be at Glastonbury; but
another Patrick there was, perhaps a third, and one of note too,
stiled Sænor Sæenex Patricius, as appears by the learned primate. He
is said to be at the same time, and that he was Domesticus Sancti
Patricii. Another there was also at some hundred years distance. With
one of these it may better accord than with the great Patricius, who
it may be said, had his name Dignitatis causa, as was usual with the
Romans and Athenians, his parental name being Moun or Muun.

The town of Stratton, in Cornish Straneton, a green dispersed with
houses. Near this town is the place where the Cornish forces, on
behalf of King Charles the Second, obtained the glorious victory over
the rebellious army, anno 1643. In memory of which battle Sir Ralph
Hopton was created Baron of Stratton, who afterwards dying without
issue, the same title was conferred upon Sir John Berkley, both which
lords were commanders in the Cornish army at that time.

There is a pretty vulgar fiction that Tamar, Tamara, being a
subterraneous nymph, was courted and sought after by Tavy and Tawrage,
who found her sitting under a bush at Morewinstow, the furthest part
of Cornwall in the north. They being weary in searching after her, sat
down by her and slept; she perceiving them to be fallen asleep, steals
away from them suddenly and goes directly to the south. Tavy being
first awakened, goes away silently after her, not acquainting his
co-rival therewith. Tawrage that awakened last, finding them both
gone, in haste rusheth out, and angrily runs away towards the north,
foaming and fretting all along as he goes, till he loses himself in
the Sabrina; whilst Tavy, on the Devon side, sends out some of his
small streams to visit and court her, and to observe which way the
nymph went, but she having got the start of him, leaves not of her
speed till she comes into the Sound.


ANTIQUITIES CORNUONTANIC.

_The causes of the Cornish Speech’s Decay._

1. The first and great cause of the decay of the Cornish speech was
their want of a character, which not only contributed to the decay of
the tongue, but to the vanquishing of the nation of the Britons, they
being thereby disabled upon emergent occasions to write or communicate
with one another against their invaders, and so “dum pugnabant singuli
vincuntur universi,” as Tacitus says; and he also observes, “non aliud
adversus validissimas gentes pro Romanis utilius quàm quod in commune
non consulebant.”

What would have become of the Roman tongue, when the Goths and Vandals
broke in upon Rome and all Italy, mixing the Roman tongue with their
Runa-Gothica, if there had not been learned men (amounting to 160
elegant classical authors in Augustus his time) who preserved the
tongue in their works?

I know it hath been and yet is the judgment of learned men, that the
old Britons never had any character, yet I hope they will give me the
liberty of declaring the reasons of my dissenting. I. It hath always
been supposed that Ireland had a character; now Ireland was always
accounted a British Island, however; yet I cannot positively affirm
that the character which the Bishop of Tuam sets forth as British be
really so, there seeming to be little difference between that and the
old Saxon; neither can I consent to what he saith, that the Saxons,
whom he calls their neighbours, learned their very characters from
Ireland.

2. Though we may depend on Cæsar’s[30] authority, that Druidum
doctrina non fuit literis mandata, sed memoriæ fuit, ne aut in vulgus
proficiscentur, aut juventus qui eam perdiscebant negligentia aut in
curia remitterent, which reasons, in my judgment, rather demonstrate
that they had a character to communicate their doctrines by, if they
had pleased to use it. II. The great use made of the Roman tongue, the
laws of their conquest extending to letters and speech, as well as to
territory; and where there is a delight, there are things best
retained. Romanam Linguam Britanni non abnuebant, ut eloquentiam
concupisserent. Tacit.

     Fertur habere meos, si vera est fama, libellos
       Inter delicias pulchra Vienna suas.
     Dicitur et nostros cantare Britannia versus.
                                                  Martial.[31]

Afri, Galli, Hispani avido arripuerunt et inducto novo paulatim
oblituerunt veterum sermonem. Lips.

III. The great loss of Armorica, near unto us, by friendship, by
cognition, by interest, by correspondence. Cornwall has received
princes from thence, and they from us. We had heretofore mutual
interchanges of private families, but as to our speech we are alike
careless. We can understand words of one another, but have not the
benefit of conferences with one another in our ancient tongue. I have
met with some Friars born and bred there, who, one would think, should
be able to discourse of their own pristine tongue, and of their own
birthplaces, yet found them, though not totally ignorant that such
things had been, yet insensible and careless of their former
condition. They could tell me that my name Scawen, was in their tongue
Elders, as here it is; that there are those that bear the same name,
and one of them a bishop; but when he writ it he changed it to
Sambucus, shewing thereby a mind declared to a new, rather than an
inclination to his old name, and relation to his country speech.

IV. But, least the tender lamentations of those losses should be
thought to put us out of memory of the loss of our tongue, the matter
which we have in hand, we are here to mention a fourth cause, and that
which most concerns this Peninsula of Cornwall, which is the giving
over of the Guirremears,[32] which were used at the great conventions
of the people, at which they had famous interludes celebrated with
great preparations, and not without shews of devotion[33] in them,
solemnized in open and spacious downs of great capacity, encompassed
about with earthen banks, and in some part stone work of largeness to
contain thousands, the shapes of which remain in many places at this
day, though the use of them long since gone. These were frequently
used in most parts of the county, at the conveniency of the people,
for their meeting together, in which they represented, by grave
actings, scriptural histories, personating patriarchs, princes, and
other persons; and with great oratory pronounced their harangue,
framed by art, and composed with heroic stile, such as have been known
to be of old in other nations, as Gualterius,[34] an ancient father,
hath been mentioned to be. This was a great means to keep in use the
tongue with delight and admiration, and it continued also friendship
and good correspondency in the people. They had recitations in them
poetical and divine, one of which I may suppose this small relique of
antiquity to be, in which the passion of our Saviour, and his
resurrection, is described. They had also their Carols at several
times, especially at Christmas, which they solemnly sung, and
sometimes used, as I have heard, in their churches after prayers, the
burden of which songs, “Nowell, Nowell, good news, good news of the
Gospel,” by which means they kept the use of the tongue the better.

V. I cannot find that the British have boasted of many miracles done
among them; if any such antiently there were, they were deprived of
the memory of them by the Romans. I cannot affirm with so much reason
(as some of our neighbours have done with confidence) who say, that at
the last digging on the Haw for the foundation of the citadel of
Plymouth, the great jaws and teeth therein found, were those of
Gogmagog, who was there said to be thrown down by Corineus, whom some
will have to be the founder of the Cornish;[35] nor am I able to
assert, that some great instruments of war in brass, and huge limbs
and portraitures of persons long ago, as some say that have been in
some of the western parishes, were parts of giants, or other great
men, who had formerly had their being there. But we may rather think
those to be imaginary things or devices of old bards said to be there,
though we have no certain memory of them neither. Nor may we think it
strange that such things may be spoken of, since we may well credit
some good historians, that write that Alexander, after that he had
returned from his journey to India, caused a great representation to
be made on the ground on the western side of the river Indus, of a
huge campaign almost immeasurable, with tents, cabins, and platforms,
and arms also, for horses, racks, and mangers, of such height as were
not to be reached at; and that there were also scattered about the
ground bits and bridles for horses, of extraordinary length and
bigness, and that all this “ut de magnis majora loquantur,” and to
make men think upon him and his miraculous acts with the more
admiration.

VI. The sixth cause is, the loss of the ancient records, not of the
Duchy or the Earldom of Cornwall, (which some affirm were burnt, and
others lost in the ancient ruins of the castles of Rostormell, and
other such,) but of those of whole Cornwall, whilst one of the four
dynasties of this island, (or, as Pancirollus,) one of the five.

VII. The seventh cause is desuetude, or want of a continued use; and
it is no wonder, if, after so many losses, the true use of the tongue
vanished away or grew not into contempt. Speeches are compounded of
words, and both of them of one nature, and continued according to
their use, and of one of them it may be said as of the other

     Multa recensentur quæ nunc cecidere, cadentque
     Quæ nunc sunt in honore vocabula, si volet usus.

     Words many and tongues we recount,
     Which being fallen do oft remount,
     And those that are now priz’d by us,
     May fall to ground for want of use.

VIII. A general stupidity may be observed to be in the whole county.
As to other matters monumental, there is little mention made of our
antient stately fabrics amongst us, now ruinated; as to the founders
of them, castles, battles fought, and other things: and as to churches
(though we have abundance of fair ones for so small a county, where
there is no city nor any great town in it) excellent foundations, but
who the builders were we have no intelligence, only a great many false
tutelaries of them we hear of. Little of the monasteries hath been
said by those that have written copiously of others elsewhere.
Scarcely anything of the ancient bishops here, or of the bishop’s see;
only we know it to be said antiently, that it was removed from Bodmyn
to St. German’s,[36] and that it was about anno 1000, Danorum turbine,
from a country more open, to a place more woodland. The cathedral
indeed might have been better memorized by Godwin in his Catalogue of
Bishops, and enumeration of all the bishopricks; yet little is said of
it or the four several chapels in several distinct places of the
parish thereto belonging; and as for the monastery nothing at all. It
is strange too that Mr. Camden should say, “Germani viculum nihil
aliud est hodie, quam piscatorum casulæ:” whereas, there are no such
things belonging to such a trade there seen, but instead thereof a
cathedral, maintained at the great cost of the inhabitants, (though a
great part, by an accident, about one hundred years since fell down,)
a good monastical house yet undemolished, and hospitably inhabited, to
the relief of poor people. The bishop’s seat and house are yet
eminently extant in a Cornish name. The borough of St. German’s enjoys
still the privilege of sending burgesses to Parliament by
prescription. Pity it is that St. German, who came hither to suppress
the Pelagian heresy, should have so bad a going off; for an old fable
remains yet in report, that St. German being ill used fled away,
leaving a sad curse behind him, to the cliffs at Rame near the head;
where bewailing his misfortunes, the compassionating rocks in the
cliffs shed tears with him, at a place ever since called St. German’s
Well. True it is, such a spring there is, but the occasion of it
cannot be more truly affirmed than the other part of the story that
follows, viz. That he should be carried thence into remote countries
by angels in a fiery chariot, the tract of whose wheels were said to
be seen in those cliffs, but they are invisible. Thus much for the
site of the place. As to the person of St. German, who perhaps never
saw the place, I need not turn over old fabulous legends, nor a better
sort who have written his life heretofore, but I may have liberty to
relate what I have from the better hands of learned persons.[37] That
besides his disputation and confutation of Pelagius at Verulam, and
thereby freeing the church and nation from those heresies by a public
edict from the Emperor Valentinian, whereby they were no more troubled
with them afterwards, he the said St. German did other great works for
this land, viz. 1st. the institution of schools of learning among the
Britons; Dubritius and Iltutus being both of them his disciples.
Dubritius was made Archbishop of Carlehon; Iltutus sent to Lan Iltut,
a church bearing his name to this day; and one Daniell, made Bishop of
Bangor; from these famous men the monastery of Bangor, and other
monasteries in this land, were so well furnished with learned men, at
the coming in of St. Austin from the Pope, they stood upon discreet
and honourable terms.

2. The introduction of the Gallican Liturgy into use in the churches
of Britany, which was ever different from the Romans, and thereby a
happy means to have kept this nation from so much acquaintance with
the Pope, as they had with him afterwards, to their great trouble. It
is also said that St. Patrick, who carried over into Ireland the
education monastic, and good principles therewith, and is held to be
the Apostle of Ireland, spent many years under the discipline of St.
German, when he came hither; who, after he had been employed in the
embassy to the Emperor at Ravenna, died there one year before the
Saxons’ arrival.

All this time we are left in the dark concerning the fabric of the
Monastery of St. German’s, which could not be built till two or three
hundred years perhaps after the Saxons got a perfect dominion here
over the land, but we may believe that that and the cathedral might be
dedicated to his memory afterwards, in respect of the many good works
he had done elsewhere.

IX. As we have had an ill registry of monumental matters, so for five
or six centuries past (before the two last), I doubt we had but few
learned men here, which induces me to put that to the ninth cause of
the decay of the Cornish tongue. After the suppression of the Druids,
and that Christianity was received, yet learning decayed some while
amongst the people, the best of them being carried abroad by the
Romans and never returned; and then the supposed Saints coming in
after them, made no reparation thereof, but by their supposed
miracles, with which they entertained the people. So they had very few
learned men amongst them, places of breeding and obtaining learning
being remote, scarcely approachable, and the nation in continual
troubles and dangers; and for latter times such learned men as came to
us, seeing our own neglect of our tongue, have thought it not fit to
take the pains to inquire into it, as a thing obscure and not fit to
be studied by them, and so suffered to decay insensibly by them and
the inhabitants.

X. The Cornish tongue hath mostly resided for some ages past in the
names of the people, the gentry chiefly, and in the names of places,
observed to be significant mostly as to the site, &c. or for some
things eminent about them. Concerning both these, I must take liberty
to shew how the speech has been invaded, and eaten up by intrusion,
much of which hath been about churches and their sites, as well as by
neglectful inobservation; for those Saxon saints have hungrily eaten
up the antient names, which, when they could not well digest for
hardness of the words, many catched up others from those whom they
fieigned to be the tutelaries of those places, churches, and
fountains, and supposed miracles wrought thereabouts, as St. Kaine,
St. Gurrion, St. Tudy, St. Ive, St. Endellion, St. Kue, Landulph, St.
Ust, St. Just, St. Marthren, &c. Of St. Mardren’s Well,[38] (which is
a parish west to the Mount) a fresh true story of two persons, both of
them lame and decrepit, thus recovered from their infirmity. These two
persons, after they had applied themselves to divers physicians and
chirurgeons for cure, and finding no success by them, they resorted to
St. Mardren’s Well, and according to the ancient custom, which they
had heard of, the same which was once in a year, to wit, on Corpus
Christi evening, to lay some small offering on the altar there, and to
lie on the ground all night, drink of the water there, and in the
morning after, to take a good draught more, and to take and carry away
some of the water, each of them in a bottle, at their departure. This
course these two men followed, and within three weeks they found the
effect of it, and by degrees their strength increasing, were able to
move themselves on crutches. The year following they take the same
course again, after which they were able to go with the help of a
stick; and at length one of them, John Thomas, being a fisherman, was,
and is able at this day, to follow his fishing craft. The other, whose
name was William Cork, was a soldier under the command of my kinsman,
Colonel William Godolphin, (as he has often told me) was able to
perform his duty, and died in the service of his majesty King Charles
I. But herewith take also this: one Mr. Hutchens, a person well known
in those parts, and now lately dead, being parson of Ludgvan, a near
neighbouring parish to St. Mardren’s Well, he observing that many of
his parishioners often frequented this well superstitiously, for which
he reproved them privately, and sometimes publicly in his sermons; but
afterwards, he the said Mr. Hutchens, meeting with a woman coming from
the well with a bottle in her hand, desired her earnestly that he
might drink thereof, being then troubled with cholical pains, which
accordingly he did, and was eased of his infirmity. The latter story
is a full confutation of the former, for if the taking the water
accidentally thus prevailed upon the party to his cure, as it is
likely it did, then the miracle which was intended to be by the
ceremony of lying on the ground and offering, is wholly fled, and it
leaves the virtue of the water to be the true cause of the cure. And
we have here, as in many places of the land, great variety of salutary
springs, which have diversity of operations, which by natural reason
have been found to be productive of good effects, and not by miracle,
as the vain fancies of monks and friars have been exercised in
heretofore.

Howbeit, there are some old names yet remaining of places of prayers
or oratories, and the ruins shewing them to be such, as V. Gr.
Paderda, which is prayers good, (of which many places are so named);
Eglarose, the church in the vale, supposed antienter than the names of
their churches. Their sites are eminent and ancient, standing towards
the east, though no mention made how they came to be in decay, but
supposed to be after the Saxon churches came to be erected, and
miracles supposed to be wrought by those whose names they bear.
Churches’ sites took new names, whereas the old Cornish names remain
in all other places of the parishes generally; yet the names of the
four old castles remain, and of manors also for the most part, and
some other things in the Cornish, and do so continue the better, by
reason of men’s particular interest in them: and so are the eminent
hills likewise, especially towards the sea, and the hundred or hamlet
names of the country remain so chiefly in the western parts; those on
the eastern, standing towards the borders, have their names wrested
away by neighbourhood, as are other things by like accidents in the
eastern parts of the county; other names have been encroached upon by
fantastical or vainglorious builders calling their houses after their
own names, and others upon vain toys; but these are not many.
Moreover, concerning the loss of our speech, and the names of
families, I must here (but tenderly though) blame the incuriosity of
some of our gentry; who, forsaking the etymologies of their own
speech, have studied out new derivations of their names, endeavouring
to make themselves as it were descended from French or Norman
originals, in adopting or adapting their names thereunto; whereas,
their own names in the Cornish are more honourable, genuine, and true;
from the Conquest, forsooth, those would have their descent, (no
illustrious thing in itself) whereas the ancestry of many of them have
been here long before. How finely many have cozened themselves
thereby, might be shewn, if it would not be offensively taken, by
taking up of coat armour as from French originals. The art of heraldry
hath been drawn out to us in French terms and trickings, mostly begun
when our kings had most to do in those parts, and so from thence it
hath continued ever since; and our Cornish gentry, finding the English
so much addicted thereunto, have followed in that tract the same mode,
and would fain have themselves understood such, when they were much
better before than those French or Latin terms could make them, in
which many of the English may be blamed as well as we; for the
herald’s art hath many mysteries in it under their French and Latin
terms, and many mistakes may be thereby to us and others who are not
well acquainted with them, but in those that concern our own tongue,
it is evident many have wronged themselves, and more may do so if not
well heeded.

The grounds of two mistakes are very obvious. 1st. Upon the Tre or
Ter. 2dly. Upon the Ross or Rose. Tre or Ter in Cornish commonly
signifies a town, or rather place, and it has always an adjunct with
it. Tri is the number. 3. Those men willingly mistake one for another;
and so in French heraldry terms, they use to fancy and contrive those
with any such three things as may be like or cohere with, or may be
adapted to any thing or things in their surnames; whether very
handsome or not, is not much stood upon. Another usual mistake is upon
Ross, which, as they seem to fancy, should be a rose; but Ross in
Cornish is a vale or valley. Now for this their French-Latin tutors,
when they go into the field of Mars, put them in their coat armour
prettily to smell out a rose or flower (a fading honour instead of a
durable one); so any three such things, agreeable perhaps a little to
their names, are taken up and retained from abroad, when their own at
home have a much bttter scent and more lasting.

Some, however, amongst us, have kept themselves better to the
antiquities of their Cornish names in their coat armour, as that
honourable family Godolphin,[39] in keeping still displayed abroad his
white eagle, from the Cornish Gothulgon. Richard, king of the Romans,
Emperor elect, supplied his Cornish border with silver (perhaps tin)
plates, deducing them from the antient earls of Cornwall, as borne by
them before the Norman Conquest, and, in honour to them and himself,
still bearing the same afterwards. Chiverton, whose name in Cornish is
a house on a green place or hill, he beareth a coat thereunto
accordant, a castle with a green field under it; which may be well
thought on as to the name in[40] Cornish, though, in the heraldry it
had been more complete. V. a castle A. as I apprehend; Scaberius,
which is sweepers or sweeping, A. 3 broom besoms V.; Gavergan, a goat;
Keverel, a he-goat, or he-goats; that creature taking most delight, as
it is observed, in the cliffs thereabout. These are better
significations taken from home, than the other that are foreign; and
yet the assumption of a coat from any particular act of a man’s own,
is better than such as have reference barely to names, without some
special signification therewith.

I had thoughts formerly, and made preparation to give many more
instances, where many amongst us have been mistaken in those two
particulars; but since it is a hard thing to convince men of old
errors, and a harder to make a question against any concerning their
gentelicions and the old forms thereof, though intended more for their
honour, I shall forbear the further prosecution thereof; but in this,
however, I shall do them right, that they, i. e. their ancestors, in
this way thus trodden, have walked generally as antiently as any
other gentry of this nation, and to my seeming, it had been better if
they had stood still _super vias antiquas avorum suorum_, since most
of those ancient families who have strayed abroad as aforesaid, have
yet some of them, and many more had, lands and places of their own
names in their possession long enjoyed; and a nearer passage it had
been to their journey’s end, viz. their honour, if they had not
adventured abroad: a testimony whereof we have in that great
contention which happened in the time of King Edward III. between
Carminow of this county (a family to which most of the ancient gentry
here have relation) and a great person[41] of the nation, for bearing
of one and the same coat armour, Azure, a bend Or. After many heats
about it, a reference was made of it by the king to the most eminent
Knights of that time, of which John of Gaunt, King of Castille, was
one, before whom Carminow proved his right by the continual bearing
thereof, and that before the Conquest, which was not disapproved nor
disallowed, but applauded: yet, because the other contendant was a
baron of the realm, Carminow was adjudged to bear the same coat still,
but a file in chief for distinction sake. The decision was no way
dishonourable, and the remembrance of the contention continued to the
glory of his posterity, to which his motto in Cornish seems to have an
allusion――in English, “A Straw for Whifflers or Dissemblers;” or as
some have said to be, “A Fig Cala Rag Whetlow;” but we may take the
same better, I think, from the very name of Carminow being in Cornish
a rock immoveable, as a sign of his resolution, from thence, or
formerly taken up.

Having gone through this passage, which I know not how it may be taken
by my countrymen, let me make this observation, that since the gentry
here have thought fit, or endeavoured by mistake, to forsake the
antiquity of their Cornish names, and thereby their greatest interest,
might perhaps prognosticate that their language, which was their
ancient glory, should in revenge forsake them, as now it hath almost
done; and I shall proceed to assign some other causes of the decay
thereof.

XI. The vicinity, or near neighbourhood with Devon. I may say that
vicinity only with the Devonians, we having none else, which next to
the corruption of tongues by time and superstition to saints, hath
most devoured the names of places, especially on the borders of
Cornwall with Devon; and there is the worst language commonly spoken,
and spoken rudely too, which corrupts not only their own country
tongue but ours also, in the places that are nearest to them, and
those infect others nearest to them. The names of the places are
thereby also much altered in the Cornish, which antiently they had
generally, and the particulars that do yet appear, do stand as marks
only to shew that what were formerly had are now much eaten away, on
the borders especially. ’Tis observed also elsewhere in this county
furthest west, where the Cornish hath been most spoken, that the
English thereabouts is much better than the same is in Devon, or the
places bordering on them, by being most remote from thence from whence
the corruption proceeds.

XII. Our gentry, and others, antiently kept themselves in their
matches unmixt, commonly at home in their own country, both sons and
daughters desiring much to do so, whereby they preserved their names
here, and races the better; and when their names changed, it hath been
observed to be to the places of their abode, sometimes willingly,
sometimes by accident. So it hath continued the Cornish names to the
places, and consequently the tongue. But indeed of late our gentry
have frequently sought out foreign marriages in other counties,
whereby, though it may be confessed they have brought in much wealth,
and have goodly inheritances abroad, yet their offsprings have been
dissipated, and their affection less intire to the county, the
country-men, and country speech; yet it is to be observed, that not
many of them have been very prosperous or of long continuance in other
counties, where they cannot muster up very many of our names of
gentry, Prideaux, Trevilian, Tregonwell, Penruddock, and a few others
excepted, which shews that our Cornish are like those trees that
thrive best and live longest in their own peculiar soil and air, which
yet is fruitful and durable to those that come in amongst us. Not only
gentry, which are very many, that have great inheritance by their
matches here with Cornish families, but many others also, which seldom
leave this country when they have been planted here.

XIII. The coming-in of strangers of all sorts upon us, artificers,
traders, home-born and foreigners, whom our great commodities of tin
(more profitable to others than ourselves) and fishing, have invited
to us to converse with, and often to stay with us; these all, as they
could not easily learn our tongue, for which they could not find any
guide or direction, especially in these latter days, nor the same
generally spoken or affected amongst ourselves, so they were more apt
and ready to let loose their own tongues to be commixed with ours, and
such, for the novelty sake thereof, people were more ready to receive
than to communicate ours to any improvement to them. But ministers in
particular have much decreased the speech; this country being far from
academies, strangers from other parts of the kingdom have sought, as
they still do, and have had their promotions here, where benefices are
observed to be very good, and those have left their progenies, and
thereby their names, remaining behind them, whereby the Cornish names
have been diminished, as the tongue also: so that, as the reputed
saints heretofore where they seated themselves, have robbed the places
where their churches now stand for the most part of the Cornish names
they had before, so the ministers since those times coming from other
places, and other strangers, have filled up in many places the
inhabitants and places here with their new names and titles brought
amongst us, to the loss of many of the old. Here too we may add what
wrong another sort of strangers have done to us, especially in the
civil wars, and in particular by destroying of Mincamber, a famous
monument, being a rock of infinite weight, which, as a burden, was
laid upon other great stones, and yet so equally thereon poised up by
nature only, as a little child could instantly move it, but no one man
or many remove it. This natural monument all travellers that came that
way desired to behold; but in the time of Oliver’s usurpation, when
all monumental things became despicable, one Shrubsall, one of
Oliver’s heroes, then governor of Pendennes, by labour and much ado
caused to be undermined and thrown down, to the great grief of the
country, but to his own great glory as he thought, doing it as he
said, with a small cane in his hand. I myself have heard him to boast
of this act, being a prisoner then under him.

XIV. Another cause I shall mention as a great loss of the tongue,
though it be a great and wonderful advantage to the people otherwise:
the orders of the church and state, commanding all the people young to
learn the Lord’s Prayer, Belief, &c. in the vulgar tongue, supposing
that to be intended the English, if a mother, surely a stepmother to
us. Younglings take in that most, and retain longest, wherewith they
are seasoned and bred up in their education.

Herein we must complain also of another new neglect to our speech,
that the like care was not taken for us as for our brethren in Wales,
in the making of the late act of Parliament for the uniformity of the
Common Prayer, by which the five Bishops for Wales were commanded to
see the Service Book to be printed in the Welch tongue. If it had been
so here it had been a good counterpoise for the loss formerly
mentioned concerning the young people; this might also perhaps have
saved us some labour in this our undertaking, and it would have been
of good use for some of our[42] old folks also, for we have some among
these few that do speak Cornish, who do not understand a word of
English, as well as those in Wales, and those may be many in some of
the western parts, to whom Mr. Francis Robinson, parson of
Landawednack told me, he had preached a sermon not long since in the
Cornish tongue, only well understood by his auditory. This should have
been taken into consideration by our gentlemen burgesses in that and
other Parliaments, and by our bishops also; but better it had been if
our ancient bishops when they fled hither from their invaders, had
brought with them a character of their ancient speech, or left books
written therein; or, in defect thereof, they or any other had done for
us as Ulphius the bishop did for the Goths when they came to be seated
in Italy, who there invented new Gothic letters for his people, and
translated the Holy Scriptures into that language for them. This
indeed had deserved our greatest thanks from our bishops, as no doubt
they had them from those persons who received so great a benefit by
their former and latter kindness therein; nor let that good old bishop
Ulphius be censured (as he seems to be) for doing a superfluous work,
because he might perhaps know that the then service of the church was
celebrated in the Greek and Latin tongues, but rather let him be
commended for his zeal in religion, and his love to his country and to
his country people then with him, dwelling with strangers in another
land, that continued so mindful of them and their speech, as we have
been neglectful of ours. He by that means continued that tongue in
use; we by his example might have regained ours, if the like care had
been taken; but our people, as I have heard, in Queen Elizabeth’s
time, desired that the Common Liturgy should be in the English tongue,
to which they were then for novelty’s sake affected, not out of true
judgment desired it. But, besides negligence, fatality is to be
considered; fatality is a boundary beyond which nothing can pass; it
hath been eminent in kingdoms and states, and those have had commonly
fatal periods, as to a time determined five hundred years commonly.
But more usual it is, that upon such mutations of kingdoms there have
happened losses and mutations of tongues; it may therefore be the more
wondered at, that this of the British, being none of the learned
tongues to which the Lord had intrusted the writing of his Sacred
Scriptures, should have here lasted so long through so many mutations,
and that there is yet such a record thereof, as our old manuscript
imports, with the purity of the doctrine therein contained, and some
other small things in the Bodleian Library.

XV. The little or no help, rather discouragement, which the gentry and
other people of our own have given in these latter days, who have
lived in those parts where the tongue hath been in some use. In the
time of the late unhappy civil war, we began to make some use of it
upon the runnagates that went from us to the contrary part from our
opposite works, and more we should have done if the enemy had not been
jealous of them, and prevented us. This may be fit to be improved into
somewhat, if the like occasion happen, for it may be talked freely and
aloud to advantage, to which no other tongue hath reference. The
poorest sort at this day, when they speak it as they come abroad, are
laughed at by the rich that understand it not, which is by their own
fault in not endeavouring after it.

XVI. The want of writing it is the great cause of its decay; for,
though there wanted a proper character for it, yet we might have
written it in the character now in use, but I never saw a letter
written in it from one gentleman to another, or by any scholar; which
is to be wondered at, and blamed as a thing unbecoming such as ought
to be studious in every thing that is ancient: but since I began to
set about this work, I prevailed upon those that translated it to
write me several letters, which they at first found very hard to be
done; but after some practice it seemed easier.

Here I cannot but lament the want of such persons, books, records and
papers, which were late in being, and not now to be had, and my
misfortune in not having translated them, that most unhappily escaped
me; one was the manuscript of Anguin, who had translated out of
Cornish into English ―――― his relations, after his decease, (having suits
before me as Vice-Warden of the Stanneries for tin bounds) promised me
the favour of those translations, but before their return to their
houses, their people tearing all about for their controverted goods,
had torn to pieces all those papers. In another place I was promised
the sight of a Cornish Accidence; but that by another such-like
accident was totally spoiled by children before it could be brought
me. I have heard also that a Matins in Cornish was amongst the books
of Dr. Joseph Maynard, but I could never attain to it. But besides the
no helps by which I lie in this labyrinth, I have likewise had
discouragements amongst ourselves at home. I have been often told
that, besides the difficulty of the attempt, it would be thought
ridiculous for one to go about the restoring of that tongue which he
himself could not speak nor understand truly when spoken, to which I
have made answer with these two following instances: one is of a
countryman of ours, Langford by name; who being blind was yet able to
teach others the noble science of defence, only he desired to know
still the length of the weapon of his fellow combatant, with a guess
of his posture, and this he practised with good success. The other is
of one Grizling, of whom Mr. Camden says, that he being deaf could see
words; that is, that notwithstanding his deafness he could answer any
man’s question that set at table with him by the motion of his lips.
This man I have seen also, and he would complain of such men as in
those days wore great munchadoes, as they then called them, i. e.
nourishing of much hair, by which he was hindered somewhat of the
observation of their lips.

I may place these two men, one blind, the other deaf, for these
qualities among the observable things of the county, knowing them to
be true,――if the mentioning these examples in their comparison do not
excuse me from being laughed at by those men that have censured me for
my attempt.


_Hic facit Adam et dicit Deus._

     Dol ony onen ha try, Tas ha Sap yn Trynyte
     Ny ad eura ty then abry, haual dagan fare whare
     Ny a euhyth yn the vody sperys sans hylly beene
     Han been nans pan yn kylly, then dozty a del arte

     Adam saf yn van yn clor, ha tryt the gyk ha the woys
     Preder my theth wull a dor, haual theym an pen then troys
     Myns us yntryr hag yn mor, evarnethe kemer halloys
     Yn bysma rag dry astor ty a veea bys mafy toys.

     Adam del of Den aras, bos guythys a uronty af thys
     Kybar Paradys myathas saen gara un dra a govys
     War bup, frut losoen ha has, avo hynny hy teays
     Sacu yn frut ny fyth kymmyas, yea proen askyens hyulkis.

     Nara tybbryth a henna, yen hyneuis pren askyens
     Ynnes a lena tya, hag a fyth marroeu vernens.


_In English thus_:

     So are we one and three, Father and Son in Trinity,
     We make thee to us of clay like to our face anon,
     We will breath in thy body spirit holy, and ointment on his head,
     And life when lost to the earth thou must again.

     Adam rise thou up in strength, and turn to flesh and blood;
     Think I came all of earth like me from head to foot;
     All that’s on land and sea upon them take thou authority,
     In this world from bring forth thou shalt have thee allowed.

     Adam so of God’s grace but keep what’s granted thee;
     Take Paradise I appoint, only leave the thing thou ought.
     On each fruit herb and seed that in it is growing,
     Except the fruit thou shalt not take――that’s the tree of knowledge
       forbidden.

     Do not eat of that’s named the tree of knowledge,
     Out from thence thou must and shalt die the death.

By this small part of a greater piece given (as I conceive) for Welsh,
by a Welsh gentleman, it appears how near the Cornish and Welsh
tongues are affined.

        ANGLICK.                             CORNWALLECK.

  Our Father which art in              Ny Taz oz yn neau, bonegas
  heaven, hallowed be thy              yw tha hanaw, tha
  name, thy kingdom come,              gwtakath doaz, tha bonogath
  thy will be done on earth as         bo gwrez en nove porarag
  it is in heaven; give us this        en neau, roe thenyen
  day our daily bread; and             dythma gon dyth bara giuians
  forgive us our trespasses, as        ny gan cabu ura chen;
  we forgive them that trespass        ledia ny ara idn tentation,
  against us; and lead us              buz diluer ny thact deog.
  not into temptation, but deliver
  us from evil.

  I believe in God the Father          Mea greez en du Taz olgologack
  Almighty, maker of heaven            y wrig en neu han
  and earth; and in Jesus              noare. Ha yn Jesu Crest
  Christ his only son our              y vabe hag agan arlyth avy,
  Lord, who was conceived by           conseviys daz an Speriz
  the Holy Ghost, born of the          Sanz, geniz thurt an voz
  Virgin Mary, suffered under          Mareea, sufferai dadn; Pont
  Pontius Pilate, was crucified,       Pilatt, ve gocis dan vernans
  dead, and buried. He                 ha bethis, ha thes kidnias
  descended into hell; the             the yffarn, y sauas arta
  third day he rose again from         yn trysa dyth, ha deriffians
  the dead; he ascended into           da neau ha seth war deghow
  heaven, and sitteth at the           dornyndue taz olgologack
  right hand of God the Father         Thurt ena eu za
  Almighty, from thence                doaz tha juga yn braw han
  he shall come to judge the           vazaw.
  quick and the dead.

  I believe in the Holy                Me a greez yn Spiriz
  Ghost, the Holy Catholic             Sanz, Sanz Cathalick Eglis,
  Church, the forgiveness of           yn Communion yn Sanz, yn
  sins, the resurrection of the        geiyanson pegh, yn derivyans
  body, and the life everlasting.      yn corff, han bowians
                                       ragnuera andellazobo.


     [25] Dr. Hammond’s Exposition to the Apocalypse.

     [26] Tit. Dij et Homines, 1. 3. p. 457, cap. 163.

     [27] Gr. Naz. in Trag.

     [28] Here passing down the river, I would willingly have
     given by the way an account of the antient Cornish name of
     that eminent place now called Mount Edgcombe, but by reason
     that the present, and some other generations, have been so
     much inclined to the name it now bears, and the other
     generations before them had given it the name of West
     Stonehouse, as in relation to that on the eastern side of
     the river East Stonehouse, where the mansion of those
     gentlemen formerly was, (according to which I have seen an
     entry of it, Cum Perco et Passagio, in an antient Ouster le
     main) I could not attain to it.

     [29] Off from Seaton, a valley between Ramehead and Loo,
     there is to be seen in a clear day in the bottom of the sea,
     a league from the shore, a whole wood of timber on its side,
     uncorrupted.

     [30] Cæsar de Bello Gallico, lib. VI. ch. 14. Neque fas esse
     existimant, ea literis mandare cum in reliquis Græcis
     utantur literis. Id mihi duabus de causis instituisse
     videntur; quod neque in vulgum disciplinam efferi velint;
     neque eos, qui discant literis, confisos minus memorise
     studere.――Ed.

     [31] The two first lines are from Lib. VII. Ep. 88. The last
     line from Lib. XI. Ep. 3.――Ed.

     [32] Signification of which word in Cornish is “speeches
     great.”

     [33] And so were the other devotions exercised, sub Dio, as
     you may see by the discourse of Ed. Jones.

     [34] Gualterius, mentioned by Archbishop Laud in a speech in
     the Star Chamber.

     [35] These bones must evidently have been found in a Cavern,
     the nature of which has been most ably ascertained and
     described by Doctor Buckland; and the Rev. Richard Hennah
     has examined another cavern of precisely the same nature,
     comprising bones of various large Mammalia, in the limestone
     formation, not far from Plymouth.――Ed.

     [36] At St. German’s, the place of the author’s nativity,
     endowed by King Etheldred with lands, liberties, and
     privileges, but what or where non patet.

     [37] Archbishop Usher, in Primordiis. Bishop of St. Asaph.
     Dr. Stillingfleet, Orig. Britt.

     [38] Bishop Hall, in his Mystery of Godliness, says, that a
     cripple, who for sixteen years together was fain to walk
     upon his hands, by reason the sinews of his legs were
     contracted, upon monitions in his dreams to wash in St.
     Mardren’s Well, was suddenly so restored to his limbs, that
     he saw him both able to walk and get his own maintenance.

     [39] Godolanac, in the Phœnician, is a place of tin.

     [40] So Molenneck, signifying Goldfinches, a chevron Sable,
     between three goldfinches Proper.

     [41] Lord Scroope.

     [42] Amongst which, as one of the fresh antiquities of
     Cornwall, let not the old woman be forgotten, who died about
     two years since, who was 164 years old, of good memory, and
     healthful at that age, living in the parish of Gwithian, by
     the charity mostly of such as came purposely to see her,
     speaking to them (in default of English) by an interpreter,
     yet partly understanding it. She married a second husband
     after she was 80, and buried him after he was 80 years of
     age. Her maiden name no one could remember, nor perhaps she
     herself. She was usually called after her two husbands’
     several names severally and sometimes together, as it is
     usual for the meaner sort of people to do. As for her maiden
     name, she might say with a wench in Petronius, “Junonem meam
     iratam habeam si unquam meminerim me virginem fuisse.”




APPENDIX.

VI.

WILLIAM OF WORCESTER’S ITINERARY.


As no account of William of Worcester is to be found in the common
Biographical Dictionaries and Encyclopedias, it has been thought
proper to prefix a short notice of his life and character to the
following extract from his Itinerary:

William was the son of William of Worcester, and of Elizabeth, the
daughter of Thomas Bottoner. His surname he took indifferently from
either; and he is consequently sometimes denominated William
Worcester, and William Bottoner. Bishop Tanner describes him as
descended of a knightly family, but upon what evidence is not known;
yet from certain passages in the Itinerary his father would seem to
have been a substantial householder.

He was born in the parish of St. James at Bristol in the year 1415;
and as he speaks of a stone vault in that city as having been built in
1428, at his own expense, it is probable that he lost his father, and
came to his inheritance at a very early age. Of his childhood nothing
is known; but there is some reason to suppose that he was taught the
rudiments of learning by Robert Lane, whom he has commemorated as a
very eminent schoolmaster at Bristol when he was a youth. In 1432 he
first went to Oxford, where he was admitted of Hart Hall, now Baliol
College.

It is said, that he was supported at the University by the celebrated
Sir John Fastolf; the same who, in his own day, had great renown for
his valour and munificence, and who was afterwards exposed to
dishonour by Shakspere, with a trifling variation of his name, and a
considerable distortion of his character. But it may be presumed that
Worcester was indebted not so much to his bounty as to his protection;
for if we may judge of Worcester’s patrimony from the few notices he
has given us of his father’s property in Bristol, it is not likely
that his own means would have been inadequate to the small expense of
a collegiate course in those simple times; and we may therefore
believe, that the connection which subsisted between Worcester and
Fastolf, was merely a compliance with the general custom of the age,
when youths of gentlemanly birth and competent fortune sought the
patronage and entered the household of wealthy and powerful men. But,
however this might have been, it is certain that he afterwards lived
with Sir John at Caister, in Norfolk, where he acted as the knight’s
secretary and confidential friend, and subsequently as one of his
executors.

At Oxford Worcester prosecuted his studies with great diligence and
success; and we are informed that he became eminent for his knowledge
of history, medicine, and astronomy. On these subjects he is said to
have written many books: yet it is likely that they were rather
extracts and memorandums, than original and formal compositions.
Besides these, he executed some translations from the classics; and we
learn from his Itinerary, that on the tenth of August 1473, he
presented the Bishop of Winchester with a translation of Cicero on Old
Age. He tells us, however, that this gift was not sufficient to
conciliate the good prelate’s regard; but he seems to insinuate, that
the failure was owing less to the faults of the performance, than to
the intervention of an enemy. Yet, whatever he might have suffered
from the malice of his neighbours, it is possible, that the offering
itself was considered of small value; and it might have been the less
esteemed, if it be true, that the same treatise had been already
rendered into English by John Tiptoft, the accomplished and
unfortunate Earl of Worcester.

But it is on very slender evidence that this nobleman is said to have
translated Cicero on Old Age. He had left in manuscript a translation
of Cicero on Friendship; and when Caxton printed it, many years after
his death, with an anonymous version of the essay on Old Age, in the
same volume, he was at once supposed to have been the author of both;
but the translation, thus published without a name, was professedly
executed in honour of Sir John Fastolf, the friend and patron of
William of Worcester; and as it is well known that many of his
dependant’s literary performances were undertaken expressly for his
sake, and, as at the same time William of Worcester might have been
easily confounded with the Earl of Worcester, there is considerable
probability that William, and not the Earl, was the author of the
translation in question, and consequently William could not have
suffered on a comparison with him in the manner suggested. Nor is it
sufficient objection to this inference, that the productions of a
writer, whose style has been chosen as an example of the barbarous
taste of the age in which he lived, were not likely to be imputed to
one whose extraordinary attainments had won the admiration of the
polished and fastidious scholars of Italy; for whatever might have
been the Earl’s superiority in classical knowledge, it does not appear
that he had cultivated his native tongue with greater care than his
contemporaries; and William of Worcester might not have fallen below
him in the rude and unsettled English of that time.

Of William’s writings, of whatever kind, very little is now extant;
and though for a few things the credit which he deserved has been
given to others, it has been reasonably conjectured, that he has
enjoyed in return the merit of some performances of which he was not
the author; but however he might have laboured in the promotion of
learning, he loved the acquisition of it so well, that he was
accustomed to say, he found more pleasure in his books than some men
derived from their estates; and to the attainments which he had made
at the University, he added, by the help of one Giles, a Lombard, some
acquaintance with French and Poetry.

Yet study was insufficient to satisfy him without observation: τὸ
εἰδέναι δίττον ἔλεγεν εἶναι· τὸ μὲν ἐπιστήμῃ, τὸ δὲ τῇ πείρᾳ. He
consequently sought to enlarge his knowledge by travelling; and he has
been considered worthy of respect as the earliest topographer of
England, “Primum Angliæ perlustratorem ne flocci facias;” but however
this may be, he is certainly the first traveller who has left us any
memorials of a journey into Cornwall; and the interest and value which
his observations derive from this circumstance, have made them worthy
of a place in the present Appendix.

The book, in which these notices are found, is entitled _Itinerarium,
sive Liber Rerum Memorabilium Willelmi Botoner dict. de Worcester_. It
had existed in manuscript only, till the year 1778, when it was
published at Cambridge, from the original autograph in the Library of
Corpus Christi College, by James Nasmith, formerly a Fellow of that
Society. Besides this, indeed, there is another manuscript of the
journal in the same library, but it is only a copy of the former, made
by the procurement of Archbishop Parker; and as it is very incorrect,
it is of no value in itself, and could have been of little use to the
editor.

This Itinerary seems to have been a memorandum book, which the author
kept with him on his journeys, not only into this county, but to other
parts of this kingdom; and accordingly we find it stored with
desultory notices of separate facts, and distant places, and abounding
with trifling and unconnected observations, which seem to have been
associated on the same page, only as the book was accidentally opened,
and recorded rather from some present impulse, than with any settled
and ultimate design. Nothing can be more rude than the style, or more
worthless than many of the statements; and whatever might have been
the writer’s real intention, it is very certain that his remarks, in
the condition which they have actually come down to us, could not have
been meant for publication. It might have been his purpose, when
leisure and opportunity should serve, to arrange and expand the hasty
and unconnected notes thus made by the way; but the brevity of the
greater number would have insufficiently secured him against
perplexities and mistakes; and as he might have erred occasionally
through the acknowledged failure of his memory, or the unconscious
influence of his imagination, it is possible that a careful and
regular composition subsequently made, might have been less useful,
than even the confused and scanty memorandums we possess.

Worcester came into Cornwall in the year 1478. Mr. Whitaker says, that
it was in 1440. How he could have committed such a mistake, it is
difficult to conceive, as the date is expressly recorded in the
Itinerary itself. Mr. Polwhele, indeed, appears to have erred
likewise; for, according to him, William’s journey was performed in
1473; but this is evidently nothing more than a misprint. In one of
our county histories, the journey is stated to have occurred in 1460:
it is probable, however, that the writer had never seen the Itinerary.

He set out from Norwich, on Monday the 17th of August, and reached
London on the Thursday following. On the first of September he came to
Bristol, and took his departure for Cornwall on the next day. He
arrived at Launceston on Sunday the 13th, and on Monday pursued his
journey towards the west. Near Bodmin his horse fell with him, but it
does not appear that he received any injury. On Tuesday night he slept
at Polwhele; and having visited the preaching friars at Truro on
Wednesday, he came in the evening to Marazion. The next morning,
Thursday 17th of September 1478, he attended mass in the chapel on the
Mount. In the afternoon of the same day, he departed for Penryn; and
going thence to Bodmin, he returned eastward, through the towns on the
south coast. The towns and villages on the north coast of Cornwall he
did not visit; and the statements which he makes respecting them, were
merely the result of his inquiries. He seems, indeed, to have been as
diligent in seeking information from others, as in making observations
of his own; and no persons, whether smiths, ropers, or ferrymen, were
considered unfit to furnish him with the knowledge which he wanted for
his journal. Amongst those in Cornwall, from whom he learned most, was
his cousin, Robert Bracey, at Fowey; but it is likely that he depended
mainly upon the secular and regular clergy, who entertained him on the
road, and gave him access to their chronicles and registers.

With regard to the nature and purpose of this journey, from the manner
of the record itself, it would not be easy to conjecture, whether it
was undertaken with feelings of devotion or of curiosity. The coldness
of the whole narrative, and the careless brevity with which the
accomplishment of the acknowledged object is related, were scarcely
consistent with a fervid and lively devotion; and the insertion of so
many facts and observations, which must have been useless when they
were written, and now owe their value to their subsequent antiquity,
while the documents of early times, and the traditions of the people,
were almost wholly neglected, could not have happened under the
influence of an active and judicious curiosity. And besides this, when
William of Worcester was in Cornwall, it was impossible for an
intelligent visitor to overlook the state of our ecclesiastical
architecture. Many of our present churches had been recently built,
and others were then building; and some account of their style and
condition, of their founders and builders, and of the circumstances
attending their erection, would have been far more amusing to his
contemporaries than what he wrote, and of unspeakable interest in
after times. And any other man, we may suppose, would have found
something to say of the manners and habits of the people, and of their
mines and fisheries; but from William of Worcester we know only by
implication or accident, that he travelled in an inhabited country.

Yet without devotion he would not have visited the Mount, and without
curiosity he would have made no observations by the way. The shrine of
St. Michael, which had been the resort of superstitious people in
remote times, had lately recovered its ancient reputation, after an
interval of some accidental obscurity; and pilgrims were again
attracted by the privileges conferred on it in the eleventh century,
and were coming even from distant places in considerable numbers.
William of Worcester was one of these; and as his penitence had
brought him so far, it might be thought that his admiration would have
delayed his return.

But the hospitalities of a place so ‘kind to strangers,’ the natural
beauties of the Mount, and the venerable antiquity and romantic
traditions of the castle and monastery, were not enough to detain him
for a day; and with scarcely any regard to such things, he stayed but
a few hours. In that short space he could not occupy himself with many
inquiries; and we have received from him only a few bare facts, which
he appears to have recorded rather as the justification of his
pilgrimage, than with any precise knowledge of their value.

His subsequent pursuits, and the time of his death, are not known, nor
have we any account of the number and the fortunes of his children. It
is certain, however, that he was married; and he is reported to have
taken a wife in opposition to the wishes of his patron. For Sir John
Fastolf had designed for him some ecclesiastical preferment, and had
consequently advised him to obtain orders in the church. _Tanneri
Biblioth._――_Paston Letters._――_Lelandus de Script. Brit._――_Henry’s Hist.
of Engl._

  _Incipiunt notabilia per W. Worcestre scripta in viagio de Bristolia
     ad Montem Sancti Michaelis in anno Christi 1478._

       *     *     *     *     *

Castellum Tregtheney-Pomerey de Devonia edificatum stat juxta
Mousehold, per 7 miliaria ultra Montem Sancti Michaelis.

Castellum Trethyn dirutum in fine occidentalissima Cornubiæ.

Turris castelli Karnbree, Sir John Bassett, chevalier, stat.

C. Helston dirutum: comes Cornubiæ Edmundus.

C. Trurew dirutum: comes Cornubiæ.

C. Treclysten dirutum.

C. Morisk, ubi comes Cornubiæ Edmundus manebat.

C. Fust, quondam Ricardi comitis Anarwit in Carnanton, dirutum.

C. Dynas super altum montem dirutum, et fons in medio castri ubi Tador
dux Cornubiæ maritus … matris Arcturi fuit occisus, juxta villam
Sancti Columpnæ.

C. Carloogus, dirutum, in villa prope Sanctum Columpnæ.

C. Keynok dirutum cum tribus wardis.

C. Laner dirutum in villa Laner.

C. Godollon dirutum in villa Lodollon.

C. Tregheny stat, pertinet Pomereys, in Trefeny burgagio super le
South.

C. Lanyhorn stat in villa Lanyhorn quondam Archedes.

C. Dirford dirutum prope Golonant villa.

C. Frampton aliter Castrum Trevyan dirutum prope Seynt Terbyn.

Castrum Tyntagelle fortissimum dirutum prope Camelford, ubi Arthurus
fuit conceptus.

Castrum vocatum Botreaux castel distat per duo miliaria ultra
Tyntagele castelle.

C. Hyllysbery dirutum per 4 miliaria ultra Tyntagele.

C. Lescars stat, domini Principis.

C. Bynamy stat, domini J. Colshill chevalier.

C. Restormalle stat prope Lastydielle, in parco principis, quondam
Edmundi comitis Cornubiæ ubi manebat.

C. Lanceston villa per comitem Cornubiæ fundatum.

C. Tremyton quondam principis prope Saltash.

Falmouth villa: ecclesia Penryn.

Turris Fowey Treweryestowe.

Turris apud Pollrewen.

C. Bodleet dirutum prope Tremedart villa ubi Colsell chevalier habet
mansionem.

C. Kellysberve dirutum prope Bokehelle villa.

C. Polwhele dirutum in villa Polwhele ubi Other Phelip manet.

C. Morysk juxta Truro dirutum.

Turris Blekennok ab antiquo prope Lastydyall nupe Hugonis Curteney.

Turris in parochia Sanctæ Columbæ quondam Johannis Tregose armigeri,
per 8 miliaria ex parte occidentali Bodman.


_Itinerarium Cornubiæ ad occidentalissimum finem._

Prima inceptio comitatus provinciæ Cornubiæ est apud Polston-brygge
per unum miliare ex parte orientali de Lanceston.

Polston-brygge per 1 miliare ex parte orientali de Lanceston.

De Lanceston usque Lyscard 10 miliaria.

De Lyscard usque Low 5 miliaria.

A Low usque Pollerewan 5 miliaria.

A Pollerewen usque Bodennek 2 miliaria.

A Bodenhac usque Fowey ex altera parte aquæ de le havyn de Fowey
distat jactu unius arcus sagittæ.

A Fowey usque Trewardreth prioratum villæ ejusdem 2 miliaria super
mare.

A Trewardreth usque Colonant super mare 2 miliaria.

A Colonant usque Lastydielle 3 miliaria super mare Fowey.

A Lastydielle usque Bodman 3 miliaria infra terram.

A Bodman usque Padisco super mare boriale 8 miliaria.

A Padisco usque Seynt Columbe infra terram in medio comitatus 5
miliaria.

A Seynt Columbe usque Methsholle infra terram 5 miliaria.

A Meschylle usque Graundpond 5 miliaria circa partem meridionalem
comitatus Cornubiæ infra terram.

A Grantpont usque Treghonyburgh 5 miliaria in patria.

A Tregonye usque Trewrwborough super meridionalem partem versus mare
australe infra patriam 5 miliaria.

A Tregran usque Seynt Mandyt 6 miliaria super mare meridionale ultra
brachium maris.

A Seynt Mandyt usque Trewrewborough ovyr the water 5 miliaria, vocatum
brachium maris de Falmouth.

A Trewrewborough usque Penryn 6 miliaria super le south see.

A Penrynborow usque Helstonborowgh 8 miliaria super costeras maris per
circa 3 miliaria de le south see.

A Hellestonborow usque Marchasyowe juxta montem Sancti Michaëlís super
litus maris 6 miliaria.

A Markysyow usque Pensans duo miliaria.

A Pensans usque Moushole 2 miliaria: Porthennys.

A Porthenys usque le Londys-ende 4 miliaria.


     _Finis Cornubiæ._

Sylla vocata Islond continet in longitudine 1111 miliaria et latitudo
4.

Seynt Mary island continet in longitudine 4 miliaria et latitudine 4
miliaria; pertinet abbati Tavystock.

Insula Rascow pertinet abbati Tavystock, continet in longitudine 3
miliaria et in latitudine 3 miliaria, inculta, cum cuniculis et avibus
vocatis pophyns [puffins].

Insula Seynt Lyda (fuit filius regis ――――.) continet in longitudine et
latitudine 1 miliare.

Insula Rat Island continet in longitudine 1 miliare et dimidium et in
latitudine tantum.

Insula vocata le Blak-rok continet ex omni parte unum miliare, et ibi
sunt cuniculi et aves, sed antea culta.

Insula septima vocata ――――.


1239. Ecclesia fratrum ordinis Sancti Francisci villæ de Bodnam
fundatur per Edmundum primum comitem Cornubiæ 13 kalend. jullii; et
ibi isti obitus inveniuntur.

1299. Obiit dominus Thomas de Cancia die 12 Januarii.

Obitus dominæ Johannæ de Kaermynaw.

1329. Richardus Rex Alemaniæ obiit 3 die Aprilis.

1314. Jacobus Penerell obiit.

1349. Johanna de Carmynaw obiit.

1342. Elizabet Peuerell obiit.

Johannes filius Radulphi domini de Kayryshays, primus fundator
ecclesiæ fratrum, obiit 3 die junii.

1346. Margeria de Treverbyn obiit 9 die junii.

1372. Dominus Hugo Peuerelle miles obiit 21 die junii.

Innocentius papa tercius obiit 16 die jullii.

1349. Margaretta Sergeaux obiit primo die augusti, et hic est sepulta.

Johannes Manne et Isabella consors ejus die 2 augusti obiit.

Johanna mater Ricardi Regis Angliæ. obiit die 8 augusti.

1369. Dominus Thomas de Carmynaw.

[_These obits are more fully extracted again in p. 239._]

Longitudo Ecclesiæ monalium postea canonicorum Sancti Petroci, quondam
Regis Cumbrorum gencium, de Bodmania, continet 57 passus, et latitudo
ejusdem continet 30 steppys.

Latitudo capellæ Beatæ Mariæ continet circa 24 steppys.

Longitudo ecclesiæ parochialis de Bodman cum choro continet 90
steppys. Latitudo vero ejusdem continet 40 steppys.

Abbathia ecclesiæ canonicorum de Bodman fundata primo per Athelstanum
regem, et secunda vice per ――――. Warwast episcopum Excestriæ, qui fuit
filius sororis Willelmi conquestoris, et 3ᵃ vice per Graundson
episcopum.

Sanctus Petrocus, rex patriæ Cumbrorum, id est partis borialis regni
Angliæ, reliquit regnum fratri suo juniori; jacet in pulchro scrinio
apud Bodman ecclesiam coram capella Beatæ Mariæ.

Fons principalis fluminis de Falmouth and Peryn incipit apud montem de
Nevyle per duo miliaria ex parte orientale de villa de Trewrew, id est
per 8 miliaria de Peryn et Falmouth.

Ecclesiam prioratus de Trewardreth prope Fowey, monachorum ―――― fundavit.

Flumen fontis portus Falmouth vocatus Sowker incipit juxta Seynt
Stevyns ――――. Zugher per 6 miliaria ex parte occidentali de Trewrew: et
aliud flumen incipit apud villam Seynt Stevyn per 8 miliaria de
Trewrew ex parte orientali, et vadit per Trurew usque Penryn.

Universis sanctæ matris ecclesiæ presentes litteras inspecturis vel
audituris salutem: noverit universitas vestra quod sanctissimus
dominus papa Gregorius, anno ab incarnatione domini millessimo
septuagessimo, ad ecclesiam montis Sancti Michaeli in tumba in comitatu
Cornubiæ gerens eximæ devocionis affectum, pie concessit ecclesiæ
predictæ, quæ ministerio angelico creditur et comprobatur consecrari
et sanctificari, omnibus fidelibus, qui illam ecclesiam cum suis
beneficiis et elemosinis exepecierunt seu visitaverint, tertiam partem
penetenciarum suarum eis condonari. Et ut inconcussum et inviolabile
fine tenus permaneat; ex autoritate Dei patris omnipotentis et Filii
et Spiritus sancti omnibus successoribus suis interdixit, ne quid
contra hoc decretum usurpare presumant. Ista verba in antiquis
registris de novo in hac ecclesia repertis inventa, prout hic in
valvis ecclesiæ publice ponuntur. Et quia pluribus istud est
incognitum, ideo nos in Christo Dei famuli et ministri hujus ecclesiæ
universitatem vestram, qui regimen animarum possidetis, ob mutuæ
vicissitudinis obtentum requirimus et rogamus, quatenus ista
publicetis in ecclesiis vestris, ut vestri subditi et subjecti ad
majorem exortacionem devocionis attencius animentur, et locum istum
gloriosius perigrinando frequentent ad dona et indulgencias predicta
graciose consequenda.

Apparicio Sancti Michaelis in monte Tumba, antea vocatale Hore-rok in
the wodd; et fuerunt tam boscus quam prata et terra arabilis inter
dictum montem et insulas Syllye, et fuerunt 140 ecclesiæ parochiales
inter istum montem et Sylly submersæ.

Prima apparicio Sancti Michaelis in monte Gorgon in regno Apuliæ fuit
anno Christi 391.

Secunda apparicio fuit circa annum domini 710 in Tumba in Cornubia
juxta mare.

Tertia apparicio Romæ fuit, tempore Gregorii papæ legitur accedisse:
nam tempore magnæ pestilenciæ, &c.

Quarta apparicio fuit in ierarchiis nostrorum angelorum.

Spacium loci Montis Sancti Michaelis est ducentorum cubitorum undique
oceano cinctum, et religiosi monachi dicti loci, Abrincensis antistes
Aubertus nomine, ut in honore Sancti Michaelis construeret ――――; predictus
locus opacissimâ primo claudebatur sylvâ, ab oceano miliaribus distans
sex, aptissimam prebens latebram ferarum, in quo loco olim comperimus
monachos domino servientes.

Memorandum, longitudo ecclesiæ Montis Sancti Michaelis continet 30
steppys.

Latitudo continet 12 steppys.

Longitudo capellæ novæ edificatæ continet 40 pedes, et est 20 steppys;

Latitudo continet circa 10 steppys.

Ab ecclesia usque pedem montis ad aquam maris continet 14 tymes 60
steppys.

Longitudo maris inter villam Markysyoo usque pedem montis Sancti
Michaelis continet per estimacionem mille CC id est 700 steppys,
Anglice x tymes lxx steppys.


_Nomina principalium fluminum in Cornubia._

Thamar aqua famosissima in Cornubia.

Tavy incipit a ―――― et vadit per Tavystok.

Plym incipit in Dertmore per 14 miliaria in parte boriali, et vadit
usque portum vilæ Plymton.

Erm, magnum flumen incipit in Dertmore, et currit usque villam
―――― de le south see.

Yalm water incipit in Dertmore, et vadit ad villam ―――― per 18
miliaria ―――― le more super montem villæ Terwent juxta Camelford
valde altum.

Avyn water incipit in Dertmore, et vadit per ―――― in portum ――――.

Dert aqua magna incipit in Dertmore, et est major flumen omnium
fluminum, et currit per Toteness per spacium xx miliariorum de fonte,
et. deinde currit usque Dertmouth havyn.

Tengmouth, id est Kenton, aqua incipit in Dertmore, et currit per xx
miliaria, per ――――, et cadit in mare apud Tengmouth.

Exwater incipit apud Exmore per 30 miliaria ex parte boriali Excester,
currit per Bamton, qui distat usque Kyrton per spacium 15 miliariorum,
a villa Kyrton usque civitatem Excetyr currit per spacium 7
miliariorum, et ab Excetyr currit usque Topsam, sunt 3 miliaria, et de
Topsam currit usque villam Exmouth-havyn per spacium vi miliariorum et
ibi cadit in mare meridionale.

Sancta Norwinna virgo jacet in ecclesia, [quæ] stat per ii miliaria de
Seynt Nichtons, ubi deo fontes duorum fluminum oriuntur, viz. Thamar
flumen qui seperat Cornubiam et Devoniam, et terminat apud le havyn de
Saltash juxta Plymouth per tria miliaria, et dictum flumen Thamar
currit per Lanceston prope tria miliaria dictæ villæ, et de Ferywater
vocat. Calstokyath per tria miliaria de Tavystok usque Kaenrrovn, et
deinde usque portum Salt-ash, ubi cadit in portu maris, in toto currit
circa 40 miliaria: et alterum flumen vocatur Torge et currit per
Haderlee Toryton Bydyford; et cadit in mare apud portum sive Hamonem
de Appuldore-port, et sic currit per terram in circuitu per
estimacionem 40 miliaria ex parte boriali.

Flumen aquæ de Newbrygge per 5 miliaria ultra Tavystock vocatur Lyner
et ejus fons incipit ――――.

Mons Sancti Michaelis

Markysho 7 miliaria usque

Hellyston, usque

Truro 8 miliaria, et usque

Graundpond sex miliaria, et usque

Owstalle 6 miliaria, et usque

Lastydiell 8 miliaria

Lyscard x miliaria usque

Tavystoke, et a dicta villa usque

Okynham 16 miliaria, et a dicta villa ――――.

Tavy aqua sub monasterio Tavystoke currit; incipit in forest Dartemore
scita per duo miliaria ex parte orientali villæ de Tavystoke; sed
dicta aqua sive fons incipit in dicta foresta ultra 8 miliaria villæ
Tavystoke, et vadit per abbathiam de Bokelond per 4 miliaria de
Tavystok, et inde per parochialem ecclesiam de Beereferrys ubi les
sylver mynes fodiuntur, et abinde cadit in aquam de Tamar infra
spacium miliaris supradicti portus.

Pons aquæ Lyners vocat Newbryge distat ex parte meridionali et
orientali de Tavystoke per 5 miliaria, id est, a villa de Lescard
eundo versus monasterium Tavystoke.

Okyhampton.

Stykylpath distat a Okynton 3 miliaria, et ibi est fons vocatus
Tow-water, et incipit per tria miliaria ex parte meridionali, et vadit
per mare septemtrionale per Ydy usque Barstaple.

Zeele villa sequitur prope Stykylpath per unum miliare.

Crokornwylle distat per 10 miliaria de Okynampton inter dictam villam
et Crokyniwelle, et distat ab Excestre 10 miliaria.

Excestre civitas.


_Informacio Thomæ Peperelle de Tavystoke notarii publici._

Sanctus Ramonus episcopus Hiberniæ jacet in scrinio in ecclesia
abbathiæ de Tavystoke inter chorum et capellam Beatæ Mariæ; et ejus
dies translacionis agitur 5 die januarii, vigiliæ epiphaniæ, et ejus
dies obitus agitur die 28 Augusti.

Sanctus Barnocus, anglice Barnoc, heremita, jacet apud Bramton per 4
miliaria ex parte norwest de Berstaple; fuit filius regis Calabriæ;
ejus dies agitur 7 die januarii.

Sanctus Herygh, frater Sancti Vuy, episcopus, jacet in quadam ecclesia
scita sub cruce ecclesiæ Sancti Pauli Londoniarum; ejus dies agitur in
vigilia omnium sanctorum, id est ultimo die octobris.

Sanctus Vuy, frater Sancti Herygh, jacet in ecclesia parochiali Sancti
Vuy prope villam Lalant super mare boriale per tria miliaria de
Mont-Myghell; ejus dies agitur die primo februarii.

Sancta Hya, id est Seynt Hy, soror Sancti Herygh et soror Sancti Vuy,
virgo jacet in ecclesia parochiali villæ Seynt Hy super mare boriale
circa 12 miliaria ab ultimo fine occidentalis regni Angliæ; et ejus
dies agitur tertio die februarii.

Castrum quadratum de Lydiford fundatum fuit antiquis annis preteritis
per primores Cornubiæ tum conver ――――.

Pons profundissimus tocius Angliæ sub ponte et strictus ――――.

Flumen pontis altissimi sub castro de Lydyford per sex miliaria de
Tavystoke, et 6 usque Tokynton; currit de Dertmore fons ejus per 10
miliaria ex parte boriali maris prope villam Seynt Nyghtow, et currit
usque aquam portus de Plymouth.

Castrum prenobile de Okehampton prope villam Okehampton per 12
miliaria de Tavystoke versus orientem et Excestriam, quondam Thomæ
Curteny comitis Devoniæ, edificatum per Thomam primum comitem.

Fons fluminis de Okehampton currit sub castro supradicto, incipit apud
Cremere in Thertmore, et currit usque Lydiford villam et ad Barstaple,
incidens in mare boriale portus Barnstaple.

Sancti Michaelis archangeli apparicio in castello Angeli Romæ die 8
Maii.

Sancti Michaelis in monte die 16 Octobris.

Sanctus Gyermocus episcopus, dies ejus agitur die Sancti Johannis in
festo natalis: per tria miliaria de monte Sancti Michaelis.

Sancta Branca virgo, dies ejus agitur die primo ―――― jacet in ecclesia
prædictæ sanctæ per IIII miliaria montis Michaelis.

Sancta Matheriana virgo jacet in ecclesia parochiæ de Mynstre per
dimidium miliare de Botreaux castelle, et per III miliaria de
Camelford: fecit unum miraculum de quodam homine extra sensum, ac una
muliere et quadam puella in festo Sancti Jacobi, uno anno preterito,
et ejus festum agitur circa 9 diem aprilis, secundum relacionem ――――
rectoris parochiæ villa de Mynster.


  _In libro Kalendarii principalis libri Antiphaner ecclesiæ Thomæ
     prioris canonicorum de Bodman inveni scriptum de bona manu._

Sanctus Codocus confessor, 24 die Januarii, C littera.

Sanctus Pieranus episcopus, 5 die Martii, A littera.

Sanctus Wenedocus, et Felicitatis virginis, 7 die Marcii.

Sanctus Constantinus rex et martir, 9 die Marcii, E. littera.

Sanctus Woronus confessor, die 7 Aprilis, F. littera.

Sanctus Ydrocus confessor, die 5 Maii, F. littera.

Sanctus Karantocus episcopus et confessor, 16 die die Maii, C.
littera.

Sancta Potenciana virgo, die Sancti Dunstani archiepiscopi.

Sanctus Germanus episcopus et confessor, die 27 Maii.

Dedicatio ecclesiæ conventualis Bodman 24 die Augusti.

Sanctus ―――― heremita die 21 Augusti, B. littera.

Exaltacio Sancti Petroci die exaltacionis sanctæ crucis.

Sanctus Laudus 21 die septembris.

Translacio Sancti Petroci die 8 octobris, A littera.

Sanctus Johannes archiepiscopus Ebor. die 25 octobris.

Sanctus Withinocus episcopus et confessor, die 7 Novembris C littera.

Sancta Menna martir, die XI novembris.

Sancta Menefreda virgo non martir, die 24 novembris F. littera.

Sanctus Osmundus episcopus 4 die decembris.

Sanctus Servacius episcopus.

Sanctus Senseus jacet in parochia Sancti Justi juxta Hellyston circa 4
miliaria.

Memorandum quod villa Lawnceston est principalis et major latititudo
tocius comitatus Cornubiæ, quia distat a mare boriali per 9 miliaria
ex parte orientali, 20 miliaria de mare Severn ex parte boriali, et
similiter decem miliaria a mare ex parte meridionali.

Flumen aquæ de Bodman incipit in prioratu Sancti Petroci de Bodman; le
Carn-Water nominatur a quodam homine vocato Carn, qui fecit pontem in
villa Bodman; et cadit in aquam vocatam Dynmere per unum miliare
versus boriale mare de Bodman; et sic vadit per villam Pascow per 12
miliaria de Bodman versus mare boriale, ubi capit in portu maris
borialis post transitum super Dynmerbrygge [qui] continet 6 archuatas,
et per Wadebrygge qui continet 12 archuatas de lapidibus constructas.


  _Memorandum de ortu foncium et aquarum fluminum in comitatu Cornubiæ
  et Devoniæ._

Excestre aqua incipit ――――.

Tyngmouth flumen, aqua proxima versus Myghellmont, incipit apud ――――.

Flumen Deerso, quod vadit ad hamonem villæ Totenese, et sic usque
Dartemouth.

Flumen Plymouth.

Flumen Tavystoke incipit circa 3 miliaria ex parte boriali Tavystoke,
cadit in Ashwater.

Flumen Plinmouth.

Flumen pontis Riale incipit in parte boriali Launceston per tria
miliaria, cadit in Ashwater; prima aqua Tamar, ubi est passagium per
decem miliaria ad mare meridionale.

Flumen aquæ vocatæ Low-log incipit in le mere ex parte boriali Lyscard
et Lascydialle-brigge, et cadit in mari apud portum Low.

Flumen aquæ de Fowey vadit per Reppynbrygge per 6 miliaria citra
Fowey; incipit apud fontem vocatum Few per IIII miliaria ultra
Lascidyelle.

Flumen aquæ Trywardreth prope Fowey incipit in parochia villæ Seynt
Austell et cadit in Trewardreth bay.

Flumen aquæ Trywoodreth vadit per Valemouth portum.

Flumen portus Barleford.

Insula de Greef scita est in Cornubia juxta prioratum monachorum de
Trewdreth, juxta villam de Fowey per tria miliaria ex parte
occidentali; et dicta insula jacet ex opposito patriæ Britanniæ vocatæ
le Foorne. Et insula Ushand jacet in le seebord, anglice south et
north, per distanciam latitudinis de le narrow see vocatum aliter le
channel de Flaunders per spacium v kennyngys, et quilibet kennyng
continet VII leucas, id est 21 miliaria, unde sunt cv miliaria; hæc
habentur per informacionem Roberti Bracey consanguinei mei apud Fowey.

Insula Camber est ex opposito Wynchelsea et Rye, distat a firma terra
de Wynchylsee per 3 miliaria, et continet ex omni parte circa duo
milliaria, et est in media dictæ insulæ capella Sancti Antonii.

Insula parva, anglice a rok, vocata Edestone, scita sowth et north ex
opposito Plymouth, aliter dicta le forland de Raume opyn upon
Plymmouth, et jacet in le narrow-see per circa 15 miliaria.

Insula Sancti Michaelis de Loo jacet anglice opyn upon villæ Loo,
videlicet per 5 miliaria ex parte orientali de Fowey, et a firma terra
in mari per unum miliare, et continet in circuitu per 4 miliaria, et
in latitudine ex omni parte per 1 miliare.

Insula montis Sancti Michaelis continet in circuitu circa unum
miliare, et distat a firma terra per jactum unius sagittæ; et insula
Ushand in Britannia est in meridionali parte insulæ de Mont-Myghelle.

Pentybers-rok, maximus scopulus, in aqua Severn scita, ex parte
occidentali portus de Padistow ac castri Tyntagelle per 4 miliaria, et
distat a firma terra per unum miliare, et ibi nidificant aves vocatæ
ganettys, gullys, seemowys, et cæteræ aves marinæ.

Insula Sancti Nicholai in portu de Plymouth scita continet in
longitudine ―――― et latitudine ――――.

Et ibi est capella Sancti Nicholai fundata.


  _Bodman Villa._

Longitudo ecclesiæ prioratus canonicorum Bodman continet 64 virgas.

Latitudo ejus continet 17 virgas.

Companile continet in latitudine 7 virgas.

1239. Ecclesiam fratrum Sancti Francisci de Bodman Richardus comes
Cornubiæ, filius fratris Henrici tercii, fundavit; et anno Christi
1352 dedicata est ecclesia per Johannem de Grandissono Exoniensem
episcopum.


  _In martirologio fratrum minorum Bodman._

Scriptum est, lex gratitudinis requirit, ut beneficia beneficiis
recompensentur, unde Beatus Augustinus libro soliloquiorum dicit,
beneficium accepisti, et auctorem ejus non agnoscis; dominus in
manifesto, et largitor in occulto, ista arguunt ingratitudinem: et
quia labilis est humana memoria, ne multiplicia beneficia facta in
ecclesia monasterii Sancti Benedicti de Hulmo, diocesis Norwicensis,
per Johannem Fastolf chevalier, ideo dignum duxi dicta hic in scripto
redigere ut patebit inferius.


  _Nobiles et generosi in kalendario fratrum Sancti Francisci de
  Bodman._

Edmundus et Johannes comites Cornubiæ.

Johannes filius Radulphi de Bodman.

Dominus Johannes de Arundell chevalier.

Dominus Willelmus Seregeaux.

Dominus Hugo Peverelle.

Dominus Thomas de Cantia.

Dominus Johannes Beaupree.

Dominus ―――― Trewynt.

1369. Dominus Thomas Carmynew miles.

Dominus Willelmus Sergeaux.

Dominus Willelmus Trelothyk.

Dominus Baldewynus de Bello prato.

Dominus Edmundus Hywys armiger.

Dominus Walterus Blewet.

Willelmus Blundelle.

Dominus Thomas de Cantia, obiit anno Christi 1299.

1360. Domina Sibilia Daime obiit.

Richardus rex Alemaniæ, comes Cornubiæ, 3 die Aprilis obiit.

1314. Jacobus de Peverelle obiit.

1346. Margeria de Treverbyw obiit.

1327. Hugo de Peverelle miles obiit.

Walterus episcopus Exoniensis obiit die 23 Jullii, precipuus
benefactor fratrum Sancti Francisci.

1349. Domina Margareta Sergeaux, obiit primo die Augusti.

Johannes Mowne armiger, die 2ᵒ Augusti.

Dominus Radulphus de Wytheel.

Domina Alicia Fittzwater.

Edmundus comes Cornubiæ, primo die Octobris.

Johannes Rodeney miles.

Edmundus Clevedon miles.

Willelmus Chambron anno Christi 1353.


  _In registro apud Bodman ecclesiam fratrum minorum._

Magna pestilencia per universum mundum inter Saracenos, qui pagans, et
postea inter christianos; incepit primo in Anglia circa kalend.
Augusti, et parum ante Nativitatem Domini intravit villam Bodminiæ,
ubi mortui fuerunt circa mille quingentos per estimacionem; et numerus
fratrum defunctorum a capitulo generali Lugduniæ celebratum anno
Christi 1351, usque ad aliud sequens capitulum generale, fuit de
fratribus tresdecim milia octingenti octaginta tres, exceptis sex
vicariis.


  _Informacio Roberti Bracey apud Fowey._

Sancta Kynburga virgo, 25 die Junii, in Kalendario Bodman.

Sanctus Vylloc, heremita et martir, natus de Hibernia, de parochia
Lanteglys, ubi Walterus episcopus Norwicensis fuit natus in dicta
parochia per unum miliare villæ de Fowey, et dictus sanctus habet
festum ejus custoditum die jovis proxime ante festum pentecosten.

  Polrewen villa  }
  Bodennek villa  }  sunt in parochia Lanteglys scitæ
  Lanteglys villa }  super aquam de Fowey.

Memorandum quod Walterus episcopus Norwicensis fuit natus in dicta
villa, et fuit filius molendinarii.

Sanctus Wyllow fuit decapitatus per Melyn ys kynrede prope locum ubi
episcopus Norwici Walterus fuit natus, et portavit usque pontem Sancti
Wyllow per spacium dimidii miliaris ad locum ubi dicta ecclesia
fundatur in suo honore.

Sanctus Barnic episcopus, callid Anglice Seynt Barre, sepelitur in
ecclesia de Fowey, et ejus festum per III dies proxime ante festum
sancti Michaelis, id est per XIII septimanas proxime ante festum
Natalis Domini.

Sanctus Hyldren episcopus jacet in parochia Lansalux juxta parochiam
Lanteglys; ejus festum agitur primo die Februarii, id est vigiliæ
purificationis Beatæ Mariæ.

Sanctus Sirus presbiter jacet in ecclesia prioratus religiosorum
Sancti Keryk per unum miliare villæ de Fowey, et cella pertinet
prioratui de Montague.

Sanctus Mancus episcopus jacet in ecclesia Lanretho prope villam de
Fowey infra duo miliaria; ejus festum agitur die jovis proxime ante
festum pentecosten.

Sanctus Juncus jacet in ecclesia de Plynt prope villam de Loo, per
6 miliaria de Fowey, et 14 miliaria de Plynton.

1457 circa, Nicholaus Radford, manens apud Pogh-hylle circa 4 miliaria
de Kyrton, juris peritissimus de concilio domini Bonevyle contra
Thomam Corteney comitem Devoniæ, fuit occisus per Thomam filium
comitis seniorem, in loco seu domo dicti Radulphi [_sic, qu._
Radford]; et dictus Thomas filius postea comes fuit, et fuit
capitaneus apud Wakefeld, ubi Ricardus dux Ebor, Georgius comes de
Richmond ―――― fuere occisi.


  _Versus in tabula ecclesiæ Tavystok._

  Cum sine spe timor, mox desperatio torquet,
  Et nisi spes timeat, subita presumpcio damnat,
  Ergo timor sine spe, nec spes valet absque timore,
  Sic inferre potest, hic amat, ergo timet,
  Est amor ergo timor, sed non convertitur inde.

Ordulphus dux Cornubiæ tempore Edgari regis fundavit monasterium de
Tavystoke.


  _Versus in kalendario ecclesiæ Tavystoke._

  Quo quis a dextris te percute sive sinistro.

  Hic perempti sunt pirati sine numero et 12 apud Sulham.


  _In kalendario ecclesiæ monasterii Tavistoke._

Sanctus Petrocus confessor, 4 die Junii.

Sanctus Nin martir, die 15 Junii.

1264 Sancti Simonis de Monte-forti, die 4 Augusti.

Sancti Adelwaldi episcopi, die 2 Augusti.

Sancti Elidii episcopi, 8 die Augusti, jacet in insula Syllys.

Dedicacio ecclesiæ Sanctæ Mariæ de Tavystoke, 21 die Augusti.

Sancta Elena regina, die 25 Augusti.

Sanctus Genosius, die 25 Augusti.

Sanctus Rinnom episcopus, die 30 Augusti.

Nō + memoria de sancto Hermeto, 28 die Augusti.

Nō + memoria de sancto Aidiano martire, 8 die Septembris.

Nō + sancto Maurio cum sociis VI M^1 III^c XXVI.

Longitudo ecclesiæ monasterii Tavystoke continet preter capellam
Beatæ Mariæ 126 steppys; et ejus latitudo continet cum 14 steppys
latitudinis navis ecclesiæ 21 steppys.

Longitudo navis dictæ ecclesiæ tantum usque ad chorum continet 60
steppys.

Longitudo chori 42 steppys; longitudo capellæ cum transitu circa 36
steppys.

Longitudo ecclesiæ parochialis Tavystoke continet 90 steppys; et ejus
latitudo continet 26 steppys.

Longitudo ecclesiæ parochialis Lyscard continet 74 steppys.

Latitudo ejus continet 34 steppys.

Longitudo claustri novi 45 steppys.

Insulæ de Sully sunt sub approtasmento Pii papæ anno 1462, 6 idus
Julii anno 3^o pontificatus Pii papæ, ad instanciam abbatis Tavystoke,
et domini Johannis Colfylle militis, domini principalium insularum, et
dictus abbas est rector dictarum insularum.

       *     *     *     *     *

Memorandum quod comes de Oxford per V annos preteritos die Martis in
crastino Sancti Michaelis, tempore quo Fortescue armig. fuit vicecomes
Cornubiæ, applicuit ad castrum Mont. Mychelle cum LCCC hominibus. Et
contra XI millia hominum armatorum ex parte domini regis E. quarti
dictum comitem obsedebant per XXIII septimanas, videlicet usque diem
sabbati proxima ante diem martis carniprivii voc. le clansyng days pro
―――― cum domino rege demittebat fortalicium eundo ad dominum regem.


  _De fundatione Collegii Penryn._

1471. Die jovis, vigilia parascheven, obiit Magister Trewynnard, natus
in villa Seynt Ives, quondam socius collegii Exoniensis Oxfordiæ,
postea prepositus collegii Sancti Thomæ villæ de Penryn per ―――― annos
continuavit.

Locus Collegii predicti in Penryn ab antiquo vocabatur Glasneyth in
lingua Cornubiæ, anglice Polsethow, aliter dictus puteus sagittarii.

Falmouth havyn pertinet villæ Penryn.

Fundacio collegii predicti per Walterum episcopum Excestriæ in anno
Christi 1265.

In anno millesimo domini ducenteno.

Atque sexagesimo post cum quinto pileno.

Mem. quod dominus Johannes Anger fuit vicarius magistri Michaelis
Trewynnard.

Mem. quod longitudo eeclesiæ videlicet navis continet 36 steppys meos;
et longitudo chori continet circa 60 steppys.


  _Inceptio tabulæ fundacionis Collegii Penryn._

     Placet mihi dicere vel stanti scriptura,
     Res auditas ponere pro gente futura.


  _Itinerarium._

Le north-see. Villæ principales super mare boriale sitæ.

Primo Seynt Hyes villa versus orientem ex parte boriali maris distat a
Musholt 8 miliaria.

De Seynt Hyes usque Lananta 2 miliaria.

De Lananta usque Redruth borough 8 miliaria.

De Redruth super mare usque Seynt Columb 18 myles.

De Seynt Columbe usque Wade-brygge [pons longus est] prope Padistow 5
miliaria.

De Wade-brygge [18 archys longitudinis] usque Tyntagell borough 8
miliaria.

De Tyntagell usque Botrowse-castell 3 miliaria.

De Botrowse-castell usque Camelford 3 miliaria.

De Camelford usque Stratton prope castellum Lynamy, domini Johannis
Colvyle, 12 miliaria.

De Stratton usque Kylkhampton super mare VI myles.

De Kylkhampton usque Almanteston et Downehedborow 12 miliaria infra
patriam.

De Almanteston usque Polston-brygge versus orientem duo miliaria; et
ibi inceptio comitatus Cornwalliæ.

Mem. de Seynt Hyes villa, et omnes villæ proxime sequentes sunt scitæ
super mare boriale versus orientem præter villam de Launceston.

Memorandum, quod pons Wade-brygge scita super et prope villam Wade, ex
parte meridionali villæ de Paddistow, continet 18 arches; et longitudo
pontis est north et south.

Memorandum in patria comitatus Cornubiæ est.

Pons magnus est scitus super aquam Tamar, est scitus inter Kylkhampton
et Lanceston super le Freshwater.

Pons vocatus Polston-brygge scitus super flumen Tamarwater, sequitur
per unum miliare de Lanceston ex parte orientali, continet circa 6
arches, per patriam edificatus.

Item, pons vocatus Greston-brygge scitus super aquam Thamar per tria
miliaria ex parte orientali de Lanceston in medio patriæ.

Pons vocatus Hautes-brygge proxime sequitur super aquam Thamar prope
villam Dyrynton, per unum miliare ex parte orientali de Derynton.

De Hawtys-brigge usque Kellyngton villam sunt 5 miliaria, et aqua
fluminis Thamar transit usque Seynt Germayn, et deinde usque
Kaergrowne, et de Kaergrowne usque Asth, ubi cecidit in mari inter
Plymoth et Saltash.

Memorandum quod aqua Thamar incipit apud fontem inter villam Seynt
Nyghtens et Torynton.


  _Memorandum de lez havyns Cornubiæ._

A Pensans usque Plymmouth havyn, et specialiter pertinentes ad havyn
de Falmouth sunt 147 portus et crykes.

Imprimis circa villam Falmouth sunt 147 havyns infra spacium 70
miliaria a Tavystoke versus occidentem usque portum Markysew versus
occidentem et Pensans.

Pensans havyn distat, videlicet ab occidentalissima parte Angliæ
proxime les isles de Syllye, per 2 miliaria ad villam vocatam
Markysyow, distat per 20 miliaria usque

Truro, distat per 4 miliaria usque

Falmouth [et] Penryn, distat per 4 miliaria usque

Seynt Austyn, distat per 6 miliaria usque

Thewrew, [Tywardreth] a Frensh priorie, distat per 10 miliaria usque

Collant, distat per 5 miliaria usque

Lastydyelle, distat per 4 miliaria usque

Fowey, distat per 10 miliaria usque

Bodennek, per 2 miliaria a

Bodennek Botroux castell, distat usque Low 5 miliaria.

A Low havyn distat usque Plymouth [et] Saltash 11 miliaria.

A Saltash usque Corgrowne tria miliaria.

Corgrowne prope Tavystoke abbotys ―――― ibi sunt salmones per duo
miliaria de Corgroyn.

Plymouth.

Distat par 3 miliaria de Saltash usque Plymouth.


  _Hinc finit les havyns de Cornewayles._

Mem. from Pensance to Seynt Yves jette 6 myle.

Item, from Seynt Yves usque Lalant havyn 2 myle.

Item, from Lalant havyn to Patystoe havyn.

Item, from Patystoo havyn to Barstaple.

Item, from Barstaple to Ilfercombe.

Item, from Ilfercombe to Briggewater.

Item, from Bryggewater to Uphylle.

Item, from Uphylle to Mynett.

Item, from Mynehed to Bristow.

Oxford ultra Faryndon 12 myles.

Faryndon ultra Bassett-Sutton 15 myle,

Bassett Sutton per 15 myle de Clak.

Clak distat 15 miliaria de Bath,

Bathe 15 miliaria.

Well.

Glastynbery distat usque Brygewater 9 miliaria.

A Bryggewater ad Taunton 7 miliaria.

Pons pulcherrimus ultra Tanton per 1 miliaria.

A Taunton usque Wellynton 5 miliaria.

A Wellynton usque Culmyton 10 miliaria.

A Colmyton usque Excestre 10 miliaria.

Excestre.

Sanctus Justus martir jacet in parochia Sancti Yoest, distat a Pensans
versus occidentem per 5 miliaria super litus occidentalissimæ partis
Angliæ, et de villa Mousehold ultra versus insulas Syly per IIII [xxx]
miliaria.

Sanctus Borianus martir est in parochia Sancti Boriani, distat ultra
villam Pensansper 4 miliaria super littus maris.

Castrum Restormel est scitum inter villam Lastydielle et Lanceston.

Lanceston villa est per 16 miliaria ex parte north-west.

A Excestre ad Montem Michaelis, prima villa Baytyns, ad Crocornwell 10
miliaria.

A Crokornwell to Okynton-castell 10 miliaria.

De Okynton usque Launceston 15 miliaria.

A Launceston usque Bodman per ―――― more 20 miliaria.

A Bodman usque Machell 14 miliaria.

A Machell usque Rydryth citra Helleston 12 miliaria.

A Redryth usque Montem Sancti Michaelis 12 myles.

Memorandum quod Truro scita est citra Rytheryth versus orientem per 7
miliaria.

1. Mount Mygell ultra Excestre 100 miliaria.

2. Seynt Mychel de Rock per 30 miliaria ultra montem Sancti Michaelis
et per 5 miliaria ultra Bodman.

3. Seynt Mychel Rowtor per tria miliaria de Camelforth, per 8 miliaria
de Bodman.

4. Sanctus Mychaelis de Brenton, ibi est capella per 2 miliaria ultra
Tavystoke versus Lanceston.

5. Sanctus Mychels borough per 7 miliaria de Taunton citra.

Sanctus Michaelis de Montague prope Yevell, et per 2 miliaria de
Crokehorn, altissimus mons.

Sanctus Myghell prope Glastynbery voc. de Torre.

6. Sanctus Michaelis Trewin per 5 miliaria ultra Lastendon super altum
montem.

Fycetyr xx m. to

Okynton, and 15 m. to

Lanceston, et est pons voc. Polston bryge per unum miliare citra
Lanceston, ubi Cornubia incipit.

Bodman 20 m. and to Metshald [Mitchel] 16.

Metshow 16 myle, and 16 m.

to Redryth, and to the (?) 10 myle, and to

Mount Myghell 16 myles, Markysowe.

Calstoketrach proper per unum miliare voc. Howtesbrygge per 4 miliaria
de Kellyngton.

Fowey moor per 12 miliaria longitudinis, et infra 8 miliaria est
Trewynt villagium.

Plymouth 20 miliaria to Okyngton.

Plymton est castell, ys 3 miliaria de Plymton citra Plymouth.


  _In ecclesia fratrum predictorum villæ Truro._

Sanctus Vincentius frater ordinis predicti 5 Aprilis.

Sanctus Illugham de Cornubia jacet prope Redruth prope villam Truro
burgagium.

1465. Rad’s Reskymer arm. obiit.

Radulphus de Albo Monasterio chevalier.

Johannes Ardell chevalier.

Johannes Beaupre chevalier.

Radulphus de Bello-prato chevalier obiit 1329.

Dominus Otho de Godrygan.

1464. Matilda Ardelie, obiit die 5 Novembris.

1264. Penryn villa prope Falmouth. Ecclesia collegii, ubi magister
Michaelus fuit principalis prepositus canonicorum et vicariorum
ibidem, fundata fuit per Walterum le goode episcopum Excestriæ; et
episcopum cognomine Graundson [qui] fuit alter ejus fundator in
beneficiis dictæ post dictum Walterum.

Longitudo dictæ ecclesiæ, navis videlicet ejusdem, continet circa 50
steppys.

Latitudo brachiorum ecclesiæ continet per estimationem tantum 50
steppys.

Longitudo chori ecclesiæ cum circuitu ejusdem continet circa 50
steppys ultra per estimacionem.


  _Apud Mount Myghylle._

Memorandum Mountes-bay lyeth froe le setre yn the est party to the
poynte of Moushole yn the west party; and the chef rode of the bay for
see men that comyth thes way ys called Gooveslake cum a yense neekly.


  _In kalendario ecclesiæ Mont Myghell._

Sanctus Wilfridus episcopus in crastino Sancti Georgii.

Sanctus Petrocus confessor 4 die Junii.

Sancta Hylda virgo 25 die Augusti.

Sanctus Hermes confessor ―――― Cornubia 28 die Augusti.

Translacio Sancti Berini episcopi 4 die Septembris, id est die Sancti
Cuthberti.

S――――. Majore martir die XI Novembris.

Sanctus Nonnita mater Sancti David jacet apud ecclesiam villæ
Alternoniæ per 6 miliaria de Lanceston, ubi natus fuit Sanctus David.

Brokannus in partibus Walliarum regulus fide et morum etc. per
Gladewysam uxorem ejus genuit 24 filios et filias, et hiis nominibus
vocabantur.

Nectanus.

Johannes.

Sudebrent.

Menfrede.

Delyan.

Tetha.

Maben.

Wentu.

Wensent.

Marwenna.

Wenna.

Julliana.

Yse.

Morwenna.

Wymip.

Wenheden.

Cleder.

Kery.

Jona.

Heley.

Lanant.

Rerhender.

Adwenhelye.

Tamalant.

Omnes isti filii et filiæ postea fuerunt sancti et martires vel
confessores, et in Devonia vel Cornubia heremeticam vitam ducentes;
sicut enim inter omnes quorum vitæ meritis et virtutum miraculis
Cornubiensis vel Devoniensis irradiatur ecclesia, beatus Nectanus
primo genitus fuit, ita cæteris omnibus honestate vitæ major fuit, et
prodigiorum choruscitate excellentior extitit.

Fuit in ultimus Walliarum partibus vir dignitate regulus, fide et
morum honestate preclarus, nomine Brokannus, a quo provincia ipsa
nomen sortita nuncupatur Brokannok usque in presentem diem; hic itaque
Brokmannus, antequam ex uxore sua Gladewysa filium vel filiam
genuisset, in Hiberniam profectus est, uxorem suam et omnia sua
relinquens; timuerat enim, ne si cum uxore sua remaneret, generacionem
ex ea procrearet, qua impediretur ne libere Domino servire potuisset.
Mansit igitur in Hibernia 24 annis, bonis operibus intendens; postea
autem visitare patriam suam volens, rediit in Walliam, ubi uxorem suam
adhuc viventem invenit. Post aliquantulum autem temporis sicut Deus
preordinaverat, licet ipse homo non proposuisset, uxorem suam
cognovit, ex qua postea 24 filios et filias genuit. Videns Dei
virtutem cui nemo resistere potest, ait, “Jam Deus in me vindicavit
quod contra disposicionem voluntatis ejus venire frustra disposui;
quia enim 24 annis ab uxore mea ne sobolem procrearem illicitè effugi,
dedit mihi pro quolibet anno illicitæ continentiæ sobolem unam quia
jam 24 filios et filias post 24 annos ab eadem uxore suscepi.”
Prædicti autem 24 filii et filiæ, quos predictus Brokannus ex uxore
sua Gladewysa genuit, hiis nominibus vocabantur, Nectanus et cætera.

Et venerandus vir Nectanus per quæque nemorosa dispendia investigando
querere ab hiis repertus latronibus in loco, qui adhuc hodie dicitur
Nova Villa; ibi jam ecclesia in ejus honore construitur. 15 kal, Julii
capite truncatus est, et caput suum propriis accipiens manibus per
medium ferme spacii stadium usque ad fontem quo morabatur detulerit,
ibique sanguine circumlinitum sudori cuidam lapidi imposuit, cujus
adhuc cædis et miraculi sanguinolenta in eodem lapide remanent
vestigia.

1189. Pridie nonas Julii obiit Henricus rex secundus Angliæ, sepultus
est in Normannia.

Henricus rex ―――― dedit maritagium Isabellæ filiæ Ricardi Strangbow
Willelmo Mariscallo primo, et sic factus est comes tocius Pembrochiæ,
et dominus tocius hereditatis.

1200. Abbathia de Voto in Hibernia; Willelmus Marescallus fundavit.

1175. Ricardus comes de Strangbow obiit.

1148. Gilbertus Strongbow obiit.

1287. Conventus ecclesiæ Beatæ Mariæ de Tynterna intravit dictam
ecclesiam ad celebrandum in nova ecclesia.

Et quinto nonas Octobris in anno sequenti conventus intravit in choro,
et prima missa celebrata fuit ad magnum altare.

Mem. quod in Anglia sunt 52,080 villas per Domesday invent.

Item, sunt in Anglia XV milia XI ecclesiæ parochiales.

1242. Gilbertus Marescallus obiit et sepultus est apud novum templum
London 5 kalend. Julii, et obiit in quodam torneamento apud Warewyk;
et eodem anno Walterus quartus filius Willelmi Marescalli successit in
hereditatem antecessorum suorum, et factus est comes Pembrochiæ.

Et obiit anno Christi 1246, videlicet 5 kalend. Decembris apud castrum
Godrici.

1246. Ancelinus quintus frater obiit, et apud Tynternam sepultus
decimo kalend. Januarii.

1438. Die jovis voc. Maundy-Thursday magister Johannes Benet rector de
Pytney obiit.


  _Viagium Thomæ Clerk de Waar, incipiendo octavis Sancti Johannis
       Baptistæ circa annum Christi 1476, equitando ad Montem infra 10
       dies, et revertendo ad Waare per alios 10 dies._

Waare.

Watford.

Bekynfeld.

Henely.

Redyng.

Kyngyslere.

Andever.

Salisbery.

Sheftysbery.

Shyrborn.

Yevylle.

Crokehorn.

Cherd.

Honyton.

Excetyr.

Crocornwille.

Okynton.

Lanceston.

Bodman.

Machehole.

Rooderyth.

Marchew. Margew distat per unum quartum miliaris de Monte Michaelis.

       *     *     *     *     *

Longitudo ecclesiæ canonicorum regularium Sancti Augustini villæ de
Allaunston continet 100 de steppys meis.

Et in latitudine continet 24 de steppis meis.

Mem. Episcopus Warwaste fundavit ecclesiam canonicorum regularum de
Launceston.

Ecclesiam Seynt Germyns.

Ecclesiam ――――.

1236. Henricus rex Angliæ duxit Elianoram filiam comitis Provinciæ
apud Cantuar. idibus Januarii die dominica.


  _In ecclesia de Lanceston._

Sanctus Nectanus martir die Junii ut ibidem et Lanson.

Sancta Monnetta 3 die Jullii.

Sancta Elena mater Constantini imperatoris.

Sanctus Pyranus episcopus de Cornubia 18 die Novembris.

In Hibernia. Translacio Sancti Genesii Lesmorensis archiepiscopi 6 vel
5 nonas Maii.

Translacio capitis Sancti Genesii martiris 14 kal. Augusti.


  _Villa de Launceston, in ecclesia canonicorum de Launceston._

Natale Sanctæ Satinolæ virginis 4 nonas Augusti.

In Britannia, natale Sancti Genesii martiris, qui ob. capitis
truncationem ―――― in ecclesiæ canonicorum Lancesdon.

Castrum de Morteyn in Lancesdon fundatum per comitem de Morteyng.

Et fuerunt III fratres sub nomine Sancti Genesii, et unusquisque caput
suum portabat; unus archiepiscopus Lismore.


  _Nomina liberorum tenentium in Acle,[43] tempore comitis Rogeri
       Bygod, qui est dominus manerii et patronus ecclesiæ, circa
       annum Christi ――――._

Johannes tenet I mesuagium, XII acras terræ, r. per annum IIs.

Hugo le Ris t. IX acras terræ, r. XVIIId.

Willelmus de Burgo tenet I mesuagium, r. VIs.

Thomas de Burgo r. pro communi habendo IIIId.

Rogerus Plantyng t. XXXVI acras I rod, r. IXs. VId.

Ricardus Stywar et Robertus de Ecclesia tenent X acras terræ, r.
XVIId. ob.

Hugo de Caylly tenet ――――.

Willelmus de Monte Caviso tenet ――――.

Godwynus Segge r. ad festum Sancti Martini per certam convencionem
IIs.

Edūs Oberdam t. ―――― et reddit per annum XVIs. VId. ob. q.

Willelmus Cosus t. X acras terræ I rod. r. IIs. Id. ob.

Placita et perquisita valent per annum Cs.

Est ibi forum quod affirmatur ad XLs.

Est ibi columbare, valet per annum VIIIs.

Turbaria per estimacionem per annum IIIIl.

Item duo molendina valent per annum IIIIl.

Item possunt sustentare L averia in manerio tempore hiemali, et per
totum annum LX porcos.

Item herbagium castri valet IIIl.

Item valor III mariscorum per annum XXXVl.

Item valor gardini per annum Xs.

Item valor prati et pasturæ per annum XIXs. XId.

Item redditus assis’ valet VIIIl. IXs. VId. q.

Item valor tocius terræ arabilis de dominico valet per annum XXIIIl.
XIXs. VId.

Item est ibidem consuetudo, quod quilibet habitans in villa, non
habens terram nec domum dabit comiti per annum id. et estimatur per
annum IVs.

Item sunt ibidem in dominico CCIX acræ et XII pertic. terræ arabilis
in diversis culturis dominii.

Item sunt III marisci viz. de Holm, mariscus de Hesty, et mariscus de
Hallycote.

Est ibidem parcus, in quo possunt sustentare CXX averia per annum, et
valet pastura cujuslibet VId.

       *     *     *     *     *

Sanctus Mybbard heremita, filius regis Hiberniæ, aliter dictus
Colrogus, ejus corpus jacet in scrinio ecclesiæ de Kardynan, distat
per duo miliaria de Bodman, ex parte orientali et meridionali, et per
4 miliaria de Lastydyelle ex parte boriali et per 7 miliaria de
Lescard ex parte occidentali, secundum relacionem uxoris ―――― ecclesiæ,
qui fuit natus in parochia; et ejus dies agitur die jovis proxima ante
festum pentecostes.

Sanctus Mancus, consodalis ejus, heremita jacet in parochia de
Lanteglas; at villa vocata Bodennek est in dicta parochia, et ejus
festum agitur die jovis proxima ante festum pentecostem.

Sanctus Wyllow heremita fuit consocius Sancti Manii et Sancti Mydbard
et ejus festum tenetur die jovis proxima ante festum pentecosten, et
ipse jacet in parochia Alleretew [Lanteglos] per unum miliare de
Bodennek.

       *     *     *     *     *

Die lunæ 16 Augusti incepi viagium de Norwico usque Myghell-mont in
Cornubia.

Martis 18.

Mercurii 19.

Jovis 21 die Augusti applicui Londoniis hora meridionali.

Veneris 21 London.

Sabbato 23 London.

Dominica 23.

Lunæ 24.

Martis 25.

Mercurii 26, hora quinta post meridiem equitavi de Londoniis versus
episcopum Wyntoniensem apud Waltham et Wynchester, et reposui apud
Wandesworth.

Jovis.

Veneris 28 die applicui ad dominum episcopum hora prandii, et post
meridiem equitavi usque Southampton cum Thoma Danvers.

Veneris predicto applicui Southampton et ibi pernoctavi.

Sabbato 29 Augusti, applicui apud Romsey-abbey in meridie, post
repastum meum cum magistro North apud Nusselyng.

Dominica 30 die Augusti fui apud Salysbery per medietatem diei ante
meridiem.

Dicto die fuit apud Wylton-abbey ad missam Sanctæ Edithæ.

Dicto die dominica applicui apud villam Cheverelle per duo miliaria
citra le Vyes, ubi quidem homo vocatus Philippus Pur pernoctavit me
sua curtesia.

Lunæ applicui ――――.

Lunæ ultimo die Augusti equitavi per villam de Vyes, Yakysbery, et
ultimo apud Manerium de Crofton, quondam Katermayno in parochia de
Helmerton, ubi feci negotium Thomæ Danvers armigeri.

Postea equitavi per villas de Stanley-abbey et Chypenham, et applicui
usque Castelcombe.

Martis die primo Septembris, Sancti Egidii, equitavi per Mershfelde
versus Bristolliam, applicando ibi hora circa 6 post meridiem.

Mercurii primo Septembris, Bristolliæ.

Jovis 2 Septembris, incepi equitare de Bristollia primo per aquam
usque ―――― et postea equest. usque Aust-clyf ibidem pernoctando.

Veneris 3 die Septembris de Aust-clyff per aquam usque Chepstow
navigando, ad prandium applicando usque abbathiam de Tyntern.

Sabbati 4 die Septembris, fui ibidem.

Dominica 5 die Septembris fui Tyntern-abbey tota die.

Lunæ 7 die Septembris equitavi de Tyntern in mane.

Lunæ predicto fui apud Chepstow.

Lunæ predicto applicui ultra aquam per Aust-clyff usque Westbery.

Martis 7 die Septembris nativitatis Beatæ Mariæ apud Westbery audivi
divina servicia.

Martis predicto post meridiem applicui Bristolliæ.

Mercurii 9 Septembris, de Bristollia hora meridionali applicui usque
Wells pernoctando.

Jovis 10 Septembris, applicui Glastynbery, et applicui post meridiem
usque Chedsey villam per duo miliaria de Bryggewater.

Veneris 11 Septembris, applicui Bryggewater.

Veneris predicto, jantavi apud Taunton ―――― et applicui ad noctem ad
villam de ―――― per 12 miliaria de Taunton.

Sabbati 12 die Septembris jantavi apud Kyrton, ubi est collegium.

Sabbati prædicto applicui ad villam Okenton, ubi est castellum comitis
Devoniæ, pernoctando ibidem.

Dominica 13 die Septembris de Okenton usque villam de Launceston cum
castro, et pernoctavi tota die et nocte.

Locutus fui de doctore Ewen et certis cronicis.

Lunæ 14 die Septembris, exaltationis sanctæ crucis, de prioratu
Launceston equitavi per le Moore post meridiem, ubi equus meus
occidet, applicando ad Bodman, loquendo cum fratre Mowne etcet.

Martii 15 die Septembris apud Bodman loquendo cum ―――― Bernard, et
equitavimus per villam Trewro, pernoctando cum Otys Philip valetto
coronæ regis.

Mercurii 16 die Septembris fui apud Trewro, et apud fratres
predicantes videndo martilogium, et applicavimus usque villam Markysew
prope Montem Michaelis ad noctem.

Jovis 17 die Septembris Sancti Lamberti, audivi missam apud
Myghell-mont.

Jovis predicto, post meridiem reequitavi usque villam Penryn.

Veneris 18 Septembris, pernoctavi usque villam Penryn, ubi est
collegium, et applicui ad Bodman.

Dominica 20 Septembris, equitavi de Bodman usque villam Lastidyelle,
et applicui usque villam Bokehenney et ―――― et Fowey, loquendo et
pernoctando cum Roberto Bracey.

Lunæ 21 equitavi per Lyscard apud Ferram, et applicui per le moore
vocat. Dertmore, et per aquam vocatam le Hach ―――― et applicui usque
abbathiam Tavystoke, pernoctando.

       *     *     *     *     *

Sanctus Cradokus est honoratus in ecclesia capellæ prope Patistow in
comitatu de Cornewaylle propter vermes destruendos bibendo aquæ fontis
ibidem.

       *     *     *     *     *

Castrum Restormalle prope villam prope Lastudielle, et Castrum
Lastudielle in Cornubia, ambo fundantur per Ricardum regem Alemaniæ
fratrem regis Henrici tertii per relationem Benedicti Bernard
armigeri.

Il port de argent, ung lion de gulys rampand armee de azur.

The felde argent, le baton zable, le lyon gulys.

Le champ de azur, et ung egle displayed de argent, oveque ung test le
beke de rouge.

       *     *     *     *     *


  _Pontes Cornubiæ a villa Excestre transeundo versus usque le Mount._

Brygge Excet’ vocat. Exbrygge.

Oklynton brygge per 20 miliaria de Excestre.

Lydford brygge per 6 miliaria de Okynton.

Hawtys brygge per 8 miliaria de Lydford.

Launceston brygge borialis super aquam Thamar, ubi Hawtys brygge.

Wade-brygge de xvi peres per 20 miliaria de Launceston in le northa
syde Comewayle.

Memorandum inter Lyscard et Bodman est Reperend brygge per unum
miliare de Bodman.

Tregheney brygge per 20 miliaria de Metsholle versus le Myghell Mont,
et per 30 miliaria de Lanceston westward.

       *     *     *     *     *

Lowbrygge ut maximus pons circa vi arcuum sita est inter Plymouth et
Fowey, scilicet in villa de Low, qui est estward.


     [43] Acle is in Norfolk, and this portion of the extracts
     from Worcestre’s very indigested collections, together with
     some other passages, ought to have been omitted, but they
     were not noticed in time. _Edit._




APPENDIX.

VII.

THE ITINERARY OF JOHN LELAND, SO FAR AS RELATES TO CORNWALL.

(_Hearne’s Edition, vol. II. fol. 69._)


From Depeford to _Lanstoun_ a xij miles by hilly and much morisch
groude baren of wodde. Or ever I cam to Lanstoun by a mile I
passid over a bridge of stone, having 3 arches and a [one] smaul,
caullid New Bridge; thorough the which the ryver of Tamar
rennith, that almost from the hed of it to the mouth devidith
Devonshir from Cornewaule. This New Bridge was of the making of
the Abbates of Tavestok, and mainteinyd by them; for Tavestoke
Abbay had fair possessions thereaboute.

The Ryver of Tamar risith a 3 miles by north-est from Hertelande
and thens cummith to Tamerton, a village on the est ripe yn
Devonshire; and ther is a bridg over Tamar of stone: and from
this bridg to Padestow xx miles. Yalme Bridge of stone 2 miles
lower. New Bridge 2 miles lower. Pulstun Bridge 2 miles lower.
Greistoun Bridge a 2 miles or more lower. Tavestoke about a 4
miles from Greston Bridg; and Grestoun Bridg, being about a 3
miles from Launston, is the way from Launston to Tavestok. Hawte
Bridg. Another bridg caullid New Bridg. Caulstoke Bridg next the
se, begon by Sir Perse Eggecumbe. Lideford Bridge is not on
Tamar.

After that I had enterid a litle into the suburbe of Launstoun, I
passed over a brooke caullid Aterey, that rennith yn the botom of
the stepe hil that Launstoun stondith on. This water, as I there
lernid, riseth a x miles of by west-north-west towards Bodmyne; and,
passing by Launstoun, goith in Tamar by est, as I did gather, a litle
above Pulston Bridg. After that I had passid over Aterey, I went up by
the hille thorough the long suburbe, ontylle I cam to the toun waul
and gate, and so passid thorough the toun, conscending the hill
ontylle I cam to the very top of it, wher the marketplace and the
paroche chirch of S. Stephane, lately reedified, be. The large and
auncient Castelle of Launstun stondith on the knappe of the hill, by
south a litle from the paroche chirch. Much of this castel yet
stondith; and the _moles_ that the kepe stondith on is large and of a
terrible highth, and the _arx_ of it, having 3 severale wardes, is the
strongest but not the biggest that ever I saw in any auncient worke in
Englande. Thir is a litle pirle of water that servith the high parte
of Lanstoun.

The Priorie of Launstoun stondith in the south-west parte of the
suburbe of the toun, under the rote of the hille, by a fair wood side;
and thorowgh this wood rennith a pirle of water, cumming out of an hil
therby, and servith al the offices of the place. In the chirch I
markid 2 notable tumbes, one of Prior Horton, and another of Prior
Stephane. One also told me there, that one Mabilia, a Countes, was
buried ther in the Chapitre House. One William Warwist, Bishop of
Excestre, erected this Priorie, and was after buried at Plymtoun
Priory that he also erected. Warwist, for erection of Launston Priory,
suppressid a collegiate Chirch of S. Stephan having Prebendaries, and
gave the best part of the landes of it to Launstoun Priory, and toke
the residew hymself. There yet standith a Chirch of S. Stephan, about
half a mile from Launstoun on a hille, wher the Collegiate Chirch was.
Gawen Carow hath the custody of the Priory. There is a Chapelle by a
west-north-west a litle without Launstowne, dedicate to S. Catarine;
it is now prophanid.

From Launston to Botreaux Castelle, vulgo _Boscastel_, first a 2 miles
by enclosid ground having sum woodde and good corne. Thens an 8 miles
by morisch and hilly ground and great scarsite of wood, insomuch that
al the countery therabout brennith firres and hethe. And thens a 2
miles to Boscastel by enclosid ground metely fruteful of corne, but
exceding baren of wood, to the which the bleke northern se is not
there of nature favorable. The toun of Boscastelle lyith apon the brow
of a rokky hille by south-est, and so goith doun by lenght to the
northe toward the se, but not even ful hard to it. It is a very filthy
toun and il kept. There is a chirch in it, as I remembre of S.
Simpherian. The Lorde Botreaux was lord of this town, a man of an old
Cornish linage, and had a manor place, a thing, as far as I could ――――
of smaul reputation, as it is now, far onworthe the name of a castel.
The people ther caulle it the Courte. Ther cummith down a little broke
from south-est out of the hilles therby, and so renning by the west
side of the towne, goeth into Severn se betwixt 2 hylles, and ther
maketh a pore havenet, but of no certaine salvegarde. One of the
Hungrefordes maried with one of the heires generale of Botreaux, and
so Boscastel cam to Hungreford. Then cam Boscastelle, by an heir
generale of the Hungrefords, unto the Lord Hastinges. Hastinges Erle
of Huntendune and the late lord Hungreford had a lordship of the
Botreaux in partition, caullid _Parke_; and ther is a manor place or
castelet. It is a vi miles from Botreaux by south.

Ther is no very notable toun or building from Botreaux by
est-north-est, along apon the shore upper on Severn to Hertland point,
but _Strettoun_, and that is a xij miles from Botreaux, and ther is a
praty market. It stondith about a mile from the se. There is a place
near to Stretton caullid _Ebbingford_, but now communely _Efford_,
wher John Arundale of Trerise was borne, and hath a fair manor place,
in the which Syr John Chaumon now dwellith, that maried the mother yet
lyving of John Arundale of Trerise.

Olde Treviliane, a man of pratie land, but cumming of a younger
brother of the chife house of that name, dwellith toward Stretton, at
a place caullid ――――. Hertland Point is a x miles upper on Severn from
Strettoun.

From Botreaux to _Tredewy_ village, on the shore about a mile, and
ther cummith downe a broke rising in the gret rokky hilles therby.

From Tredewi to _Bossinny_, on the shore about a mile. This Bossinny
hath beene a bygge thing for a fischar town, and hath great privileges
grauntid onto it. A man may se there the ruines of a gret numbre of
houses. Here also cummith down a broke, and this broke and Tredewy
water resort to the se at one mouth betwyxt ij hilles, wherof that
that is on the est side, lyith out lyke an arme or cape, and maketh
the fascion of an havenet or pere, whither shippelettes sumtime
resorte for socour. A frere of late dayes toke apon hym to make an
haven at this place, but he litle prevailid theryn. There ly 2 blake
rokkes as islettes at the west-north-west point or side of this
creeke; the one, saving a gut of water, joyning to the other. And yn
these brede gulles, be al lykelihod.

From Bossinny to _Tintagel Castel_ on the shore a mile. This castelle
hath bene a marvelus strong and notable forteres, and almost _situ
loci inexpugnabile_, especially for the dungeon, that is on a great
and high terrible cragge, environid with the se; but having a
drawbridge from the residew of the castelle onto it. There is yet a
chapel standing withyn this dungeon of S. Ulette, alias Uliane. Shepe
now fede within the dungeon. The residew of the buildings of the
castel be sore wether-beten and yn ruine; but it hath beene a large
thinge. This castelle stondith in the paroche of Trevenny; and the
paroch therof is of S. Simphorian, ther caullid Simiferian.

Passing a mile from the chirch of _S. Symphorian_ by hilly and hethy
ground, I cam over a brooke that ran from south-est-north to Severn
se, and about half a mile beyound the mouth of this brook lay a great
blak rok like an islet yn the se not far from the shore.

_Porthissek_, a fisschar village, lyith about a 3 miles from the mouth
of th’afore sayd brook, lower by west on Severn shore. There resortith
a broke to Porthissek, and there is a pere and sum socour for fisschar
botes.

_Porthguin_, a fisschar village, lyith a 2 miles lower on the shore,
and there is the issue of a broke and a pere. And a 3 miles lower is
the mouth of Padestow Haven. From Dindagelle to S. Esse village a 4
miles; meately good ground about S. Esses selfe. From S. Esse to
Trelille village 2 miles. From Trelille to ―――― wher Master Carniovies,
alias Carnsey, hath a praty house, fair ground, and praty wood about
it.

Thens 3 miles by good corne grounde, but no wood, to _Wadebridge_.
Wher as now Wadebridge is, ther was a fery a 80 yeres syns, and menne
sumtyme passing over by horse, stoode often in great jeopardie.

Then one Lovebone, vicar of Wadebridge, movid with pitie, began the
bridge, and with great paine and studie, good people putting their
help thereto, finishid it with xvij fair and great uniforme arches of
stone. One told me that the fundation of certein of tharches was first
sette on so quick sandy ground that Lovebone almost despairid to
performe the bridg ontyl such tyme as he layed pakkes of wolle for
fundation.

The ryver of Alawne rennith thorough Wadebridge, evidentley seen at
lower.

The first memorable bridge on Alane is caullid Helham Bridge ―――― miles
lower then Camilforde, but Alane is almost a mile from Camilford Toun.

Dunmere Bridge of 3 arches a 2 miles lower. Here doth Alaune ryver ren
within a mile of Bodmyn.

Wadebridge a 3 miles lower by land and 4 by water. This is the lowest
bridg on Alane.

Ther cummith a broke from S. Esse 5 myles from Wadebridge, and a litle
above Wadebridge goith into Alane by the est side of the haven. This
broke risith a 2 miles above S. Esse by est-north-est. There cummith a
brooke from Mr. Carnsey’s house, and goith into Alane, by the est side
of the haven a 3 miles lower than Wadebridge: and here is a creeke at
the mouth of this brooke that ebbith and flowith up into the land.

In the way passing from Dunmere Bridge toward Bodmyn, there rennith a
praty broket thoroug a bridge of one stone arche, a very litle way
beyond Dunmer Bridge: and a litle lower goith into Alane bynethe
Dunmer Bridge by the west ripe of Alane. This litle broke servith the
milles, and rennith by the est ende of the town of Bodmyn.

There cummith a brooke into Alaune about a 2 miles byneth Dunmere
bridg on the west ripe. This brooke riseth by south-est: and at S.
Lawrence, scant a mile owt of Bodmyn, I passid over a bridge on this
water in the way to Michale.

From Wadebridge to _Padestow_, a good quick fischar toun but onclenly
kepte, a 4 miles. This toun is auncient, bering the name of Lodenek in
Cornische, and yn Englisch, after the trew and old writinges,
Adelstow, Latine _Athelstani locus_. And the toune there takith King
Adelstane for the chief gever of privileges vnto it. The paroch Chirch
of Padestow is of S ――――. There use many Britons with smaul shippes to
resorte to Padestow with commoditees of their countery and to by
fische. The toun of Padestow is ful of Irisch men. Padestow is set on
the weste side of the haven. Padestow toun is a ―――― miles from the
very haven mouth. From the mouth of Padestow Haven to S. Carantokes a
―――― miles.

From Wadebridge to Dunmere a 3 miles, and thens a mile to _Bodmyn_.
Bodmyn hath a market on every Saturday, lyke a fair for the confluence
of people. The showe and the principale of the toun of Bodmyn is from
west to est along in one streate. There is a chapel of S ―――― at the
west ende of the toune. The paroch chirch standith at the est end of
the town and is a fair large thyng. There is a cantuarie chapel at
th’est ende of it. The late Priory of Blake Chanons stoode at the est
ende of the paroch chirchyard of Bodmyne. S. Petrocus was Patrone of
this, and sumtyme dwellyd ther. There hath bene monkes, then nunnys,
then seculare prestes, then monkes agayn, and last canons regular, in
S. Petrokes chirch. Willyam Warlewist, Bishop of Excestre, erectid the
last fundation of this Priory; and had to hymself part of th’auncient
landes of Bodmyn monasterie. I saw no tumbes in the Priory very
notable, but Thomas Vivianes, late Prior ther, and Suffragane by the
title of the Bishoprike of Megarensis.[44] The Shrine and Tumbe of S.
Petrok yet stondith in th’est part of the chirche. There was a good
place of Gray Freres in the south side of Bodmyn town. One John of
London, a merchaunt, was the beginner of this house. Edmund Erle of
Cornewaul augmentid it. There lay buried in the Gray Freres Sir Hugh
and Sir Thomas Peverelle, knightes, and benefactors to the house.
There is another Chapel in Bodmyn beside that in the west ende of the
toune, and an Almose House, but not endowid with landes.

From Bodmyn to _S. Laurence_, wher a poor Hospital or Lazar House is,
about a mile. One of the Peverelles gave a litle annuitie onto this
house. Here I passid over a stone bridge, and under it rennith a praty
broke that cummith out of the hylles from south-este, and goith into
Alane a 2 miles above Padestow by the weste ripe, and by the meanes of
the se and creke it ebbith and flowith up into the creke of this
river. From S. Laurence I passed by morisch ground al baren of woodde
a vj m[iles], leving about this vj miles ende _S. Columbes_, about a 2
miles off on the right hond.

And ther about I left _Castelle an dinas_ on the same hand, a good
mile of. But I saw no building on it, but an hille bering that name.

Thens to _Michel_, a litle thorough fare, a 2. or 3. miles, by morisch
ground, all baren of wood.

Thens a 5 miles to a litle village and paroch church, callid _Alein_.
And hereabout there is very good corne.

And so a myle to _Gwernak_, Master Arundale’s house. This Arundale
gyveth no part of the armes of great Arundale of Lanheran, by S.
Columbes; but he told me that he thought that he cam of the Arundales
in Base Normandy, that were lordes of Culy Castelle, that now is
descended to one Mounseir de la Fontaine, a Frenchman, by heir
generale. This Arundale ys caullid Arundale of Trerise, by a
difference from Arundale of Lanheron. Trerise is a lordship of his, a
3 or 4 miles from Alein chirch. Arundale of Trerise had to his first
wife one of the 2 doughters and heires of Boville, alias Beville, and
Graneville had the other; and they had betwixt them litle lak of 400
markes of landes by the yere in partition.[45] The house that John
Arundale of Trerise dwellith yn was Bovilles, and this Boville gave
the Ox in Gules in his armes. There is yet one of the names of the
Beviles, a man of a c. li land purchased by the grandfather of ――――
Beville now living. This Beville hath ―――― [ed] ―――― [brother of Sir
John] Arundale of Trerise ――――.


  _Armes in Castel Cairden._

Sir William Godolchan and Strowdes daughter his wif, of Pernham in
Dorsetshire.

Sir William Godolchan and Margaret Glynne his first wife. Margaret was
one of the 3. heires of Glyn of Morevale, by Low [Looe] water toward
S. Germans. Vivian of Trelowarren[46] maried the second daughter and
coheire of Glynne. Richard Kendale of Worgy had the 3.

William Godolchan the sunne, and Blanch Langdon his wife. Langdon
dwellith at Keverel by S. Germanes.


S. Albine his stok cam out of Britaine. There is another house of the
S. Albines in Somersetshire.

Grainville.

Milatun dwellith at Pergroinswik.

       *     *     *     *     *

Campernulphus, alias Chambernon, d’n’s de Trewardreth, et fundator
prioratus monachorum, qui post D’ni erant ejusdem manerii.
Campernulphus nunc dominus de Modbyri in comitatu Devoniæ. He was lord
of Bere toward Excestre.

  Men of   { Carow of Mohuns Otery.
   fair    { Carow of Hacham by Torbay.
  landes.  { Carow of Antony in Cornewaulle by Aisch.

                    { Vivian.
  al 3. in Menek    { Reskimer.
   of faire living. { Erisi, at Erisi in Menek.

Cowlin at Treneglis.

Cavel, maried Sir William Godolcan sister.

Petite was a man of very fair landes in Cornewaulle; and among other
things he was lord of the isle of Pryven that now descendith to
Kiligrew.

Bewpray, id est, de Bello prato.

Archedecon.

Tresinny, at Penrine, a man of 40 mark landes; most part of it lyith
about Padestow.


  _Ex vita Sanctæ Breacæ._

Barricius socius Patritii, ut legitur in vita S. Wymeri. S. Breaca
nata in partibus Lagoniæ et Ultoniæ.

Campus Breacæ in Hibernia in quo Brigida oratorium construxit, et
postea Monaster. in quo fuit et S. Breaca.

Breaca venit in Cornubiam comitata multis Sanctis, inter quos fuerunt
Sinninus Abbas, qui Romæ cum Patritio fuit, Maruanus monachus,
Germmochus rex, Elwen, Crewenna, Helena.

Breaca appulit sub Revyer cum suis, quorum partem occidit Tewder.

Breaca venit ad Pencair.

Breaca venit ad Trenewith.

Breaca ædificavit eccl. in Trenewith et Talmeneth, ut legitur in vita
S. Elwini.


_Pencair_, an hille in Pembro paroche, vulgo S. Banka.

_Trenewith_, a little from the paroch [church] of Pembro, wher the
paroch church [was] or ever it was set at Pembro.

_Talmeneth_, a mansion place in [Pembro].

_Cairdine_, an old mansion of the Cowlines, wher now William Godolcan
dwellith.

_Carne Godolcan_, on the top of an hille, wher is a diche, and there
was a pile and principal habitation of the Godolcans. The diche yet
apperith, and many stones of late time hath beene fetchid thens; it is
a 3. miles from S. Michael’s Mont by est-north-est.

_Cair Kinan_, alias Gonyn and Conin, stoode in the hille of Pencair.
There yet apperith 2 diches. Sum say that Conin had a sun caullid
Tristrame.

_S. Germocus_, a chirch 3 miles from S. Michael’s Mont, by
est-south-est, and a mile from the se; his tumb is yet seene ther. S
Germoke’s chair in the chirch yard. S. Germoke’s welle a litle without
the chirch yard.

_Garsike_, alias _Pengarsike_, nere the shore a 3. miles by est from
S. Michaeles Mont.

Milatun hath part of Mewis landes in Devonshire, by one of the heires
generall of Mewis, of Mewis Urth, a daughter and heire of the
Godalcans, married to Henry Force. Yonge Milatun hath sir Godalcan’s
daughter to his wife. One of the Worthes wives gave a late this land
with a daughter of hers to one of the Milatuns of Devonshire.

_Markesju_,[47] a great long toun, burnid _3 aut 4 anno Henr. 8 a
Gallis_. The paroch chirch a mile of. A pere by the Mount. Markjue and
the Mount be both S. Hillaries paroche. There was found of late yeres
syns spere heddes, axis for warre, and swerdes of coper, wrappid up in
lynin scant perishid, nere the Mount in S. Hilaries paroch in tynne
works.

Comes Moritoniæ et Cornubiæ made a celle of monkes in _S. Michel
Mont_. This celle was ons gyven to a college in Cambridge. Syns given
to Syon. A fair spring in the Mont.

_Ludewin_, alias _Ludevaulles_, wher, as sum suppose, was a castel, a
mile by west from Markesju; it longid to the Lord Brooke.

_Pensandes_, 2 miles of by west; there is a litle peere.

_Newlin_, a mile lower on the shore; there is a peere. Newlin is an
hamlet to Mousehole. _Mousehole_ a mile lower. There is a peer.
Mousehole in Cornish Port-enis (Portus insulæ). A bay from Newlin to
Mousehole, caullid Gnaverslak. A litle beyond Mousehole, an islet and
a chapel of S. Clementes in it. There hath bene much land devourid of
the sea betwixt Pensandes and Mousehole. An old legend of St. Michael
speaketh of a tounelet in this part now defaced, and lying under the
water.

King Ethelstane, founder of _S. Burien’s_ College, and giver of the
privileges and sanctuarie to it. S. Buriana, an holy woman of Ireland,
sumtyme dwellid in this place, and there made an oratory. King
Ethelstane goyng hens, as it is said, onto Sylley, and returning, made
_ex voto_ a College wher the Oratorie was.

_Tredine Castel_ ruines at the south-west point of Penwith; _manifesta
adhuc extant vestigia_. I hard say that one Myendu was lord of it.
Myendu signifieth blak mouth or chimne.

_Ryvier Castel_, almost at the est part of the mouth of Hayle River on
the north se, now as sum think drounid with sand. This was Theodore’s
castle.

_Combe Castelle_, ubi tm (?) loci vestigia, and Pencombe a little
foreland, about a mile upper than Kenor on Severn. Basset hath a right
goodly lordship caullid _Treheddy_ by this Cumb. There cummith a good
brooke down by Combe.

_Cayl Castelle_ a mile by est from River in S. Filake’s Paroche.

_Nikenor_,[48] a 2 miles from Ryvier, sumtyme a great toun now gone. 2
paroche chirchis yet seene a good deale several one from the other,
sumtyme in the towne, but it is now communely taken to be in S.
Guivian’s paroch; and there cummith a broket to the sea.

_Carnbray_, on a hil, a castelet or pile of Basset’s, a mile west of
Revier town. There was sumtyme a park, now defacid.


SCYLLEY.

There be countid a 140 Islettes of Scylley, that bere gresse exceding
good pasture for catail. S. Mary isle is a 5 miles or more in cumpace;
in it is a poore toun, and a meately strong pile: but the roues
[roofs] of the buildinges in it be sore defacid and woren. The ground
of this ile berith exceeding good corn: insomuch that, if a man do but
cast corn wher hogges have rotid, it wyl cum up.

_Iniscaw_ longid to Tavestoke, and ther was a poore celle of monkes of
Tavestoke. Sum caulle this Trescaw: it is the biggest of the Islettes,
in cumpace a 6 miles or more.

S. Martines isle.

S. Agnes isle, so caullid of a chapel theryn. The isle of S. Agnes was
desolated by this chaunce _in recenti hominum memoria_. The hole
numbre almost of v. housoldes that were yn this isle cam to a mariage
or a fest into S. Mary isle, and goinge homewarde were al drownid.

Ratte islande.

Saynct Lides isle; wher yn tymes past at her sepulchre was gret
superstition.

There appere tokens in diverse [of] the islettes of habitations now
clene doun.

Gulles and puffinnes be taken in diverse of these islettes, and plenty
of conyes be in diverse of these islettes. Diverse of these islettes
berith wyld garlyk. Few men be glad to inhabite these islettes, for al
the plenty, for robbers by the sea that take their catail of force.
These robbers be French men and Spaniardes. One Davers, a gentilman of
Wilshir, whos chief house is at Daundesey, and Whittington, a
gentleman of Glocestreshire, be owners of Scylley; but they have scant
40 markes by yere of rentes and commodites of it.

Scylley is a kenning, that is to say, about an xx miles from the very
westeste pointe of Cornewaulle.


Petites principal house was at _Ardeverauian_ in Falmouth Haven by the
peninsula, caullid Ardeverameur. Petites landes be now descended to
Arundale of Trerise, Granville, knight, and Killigrew.

Thomas Levelis about S. Burianes.

Kiwartun at Newlin by Mousehole.

John Godolcan at Mousehole.

Cavelle is S. Cua paroch at Trearach.

Carnsew at Brokelly in S. Cua paroch.

Nicolle in S. Tedy paroch by Bokelly.

Trecarelle, at Trecarelle by Launston.

From Mr. Godolcan to _Pembro_, wher the paroch chirch is [i. e.
appertains] to Mr. Godolcan. The personage impropriate to Heyles in
Glocestreshir. The south se is about a mile from Pembro.

From Mr. Godolcan to _Lanante_ a 4 miles. Passage at ebbe over a great
strond, and then over Heyle river.

No greater tynne workes yn al Cornwall then be on Sir Wylliam
Godalcan’s ground.

Heyle Haven shoken [choaked] with land of tynne works.

Heile ryver cummith of 4 principale heddes or brokes; one riseth by
south, and other by south west; another by south-est; the 4 by
north-est.

Mr. Mohun hath a fair lordship by S. Erthe’s, caullyd ――――.

Trewinard, a gentilman dwelling at _Trewinard_ yn S. Erth paroch. _S.
Erth_, a good mile above Lenant. S. Erth bridge, a good mile from
Lannante, of 3 archis a litle byneth the paroche [church?] that
stondith on the est side of the haven. This bridge was made a 200
yeres syns, and hath a 3 arches. Afore ther was a fery. Ther cam to
this place ons, the haven beyng onbarrid, and syns chokid with tynne
workes, good talle shippes.

There was a castel caullid _Carnhangives_, as apperith, or manor
place, now clene doun, not far from the bridg. Dinham, as sum say, was
lord of this place, and to the court thereof be longging many knightes
and gentilmens services.

The toune of _Lannant_ [now _Lelant_] is praty. The church thereof is
of S. Unine.

S. Fës [_St. Ive’s_] a 2 miles or more from Lannant. The place that
the chief of the toun hath and partely dooth stonde yn, is a very
peninsula, and is extendid into the se of Severn as a cape. This
peninsula, to compace it by the rote, lakkith litle of a mile. Most
part of the houses in the peninsula be sore oppressid or overcoverid
with sandes, that the stormy windes and rages castith up there. This
calamite hath continued ther litle above 20 yeres. The best part of
the toun now standith in the south part of the peninsula, up toward
another hille, for defence from the sandes. There is a blok house and
a fair pere in the est side of the peninsula; but the pere is sore
chokid with sande. The paroch chirch is of Iva, a nobleman’s daughter
of Ireland, and disciple of S. Barricus. Iva and Elwine, with many
other, cam into Cornewaul, and landid at Pendinas. This Pendinas is
the peninsula and stony rok wher now the toun of S. Ives stondith. One
Dinan, a great lord in Cornewaul, made a chirch at Pendinas, at the
requist of Iva, as it is written yn S. Ive’s legende.

Ther is now at the very point of _Pendinas_ a chapel of S. Nicolas,
and a _pharos_ for lighte for shippes sailing by night in those
quarters. The town of S. Ive’s is servid with fresch water of
brokettes that rise in the hilles thereby. The late Lord Brook was
lord of S. Ive’s, now Blunt lord Monjoy, and young Poulet.

_S. Piranes in the Sandes_, is an xviij. miles from S. Ive’s upward on
Severne; and _S. Carantokes_ is a 2 miles above that on the shore. Els
litle or no notable thing on the shore for so farre. The shore from S.
Ives is sore plagued to S. Carantokes with sandes. There dwellith a
gentilman of a 50 markes land by yere, caullid Glynne, yn S. Ive’s.

From Mr. Godalcan’s to _Trewedenek_, about a 4 miles, wher Thomas
Godalcan [yonger] sun to Sir Willyam, buildith a praty house, and hath
made an exceding fair blo-house mille in the rokky valley therby.

Alle the brookes that cummith from the hilles thereabout gather
to[ward] this botom, and go into Lo Poole a 2 [miles beneath.] _Lo
Poole_ is a 2 miles in lenght, and betwixt it and the mayn se, is but
a barre of sand: and ons in 3 or 4 yeres, what by the wait of the
fresch water and rage of the se, it brekith out, and then the fresch
and salt water metyng makith a wonderful noise. But sone after, the
mouth is barrid again with sande. At other tymes the superfluite of
the water of Lo Poole drenith out thorough the sandy barre into the
se. If this barre might be alway kept open, it wold be a goodly haven
up to Hailestoun. The commune fisch of this pole is trout and ele.

_Hailestoun_, alias Hellas, stondith on an hill, a good market toun,
having a mair and privileges; and coinage twis a yere for tynne
blokkes. There hath bene a castelle. One paroch chirch at the
north-west ende of the towne. An hospital of S. John yet stonding at
the west-southwest of the town, of the foundation of one Kylligrew.
The fresch water that goith to Lo Poole cummith down on the west side
of the toun, but not even hard by it. Wike Mille water cummith within
about half a mile on the east side of the towne.

From Hailstoun to _Mogun Bridge_, about a 2 miles dim. Thorough this
bridge rennith at ebbe a litle brooke that riseth a ―――― miles upper by
weste. It ebbith and flowith aboute a mile above this bridge. I saw on
the left hand, a litle beside this bridge, the principal arme of
Hailford Haven, caullid Wike, the wich flowith about a 3 miles upland
by north to Wike Mille; and this arme is beten[49] with 2 litle fresch
brokes bering the name of Wyke. A flite shot beyond this bridge I cam
to a causey of stone, in the midle whereof was a bridge having but one
arche. It flowith above this bridge; and at the ebbe there resortith a
broke thourough this bridge, that cummith down from south-weste. A
litle beneth these bridges both thes brokes in one run into Wik water.
These bridges be a 4 miles or more from the mouth of Heilford Haven.
About a 2 miles beneth this confluence rennith up on the est side of
the haven a creeke of salt water, caullid Poulpere, and hemmith in a
peace of Mr. Reskymer’s Parke at Merdon, so that with this creke, and
the main se water of the haven, upon a 3 partes the parke is
strenkthyd [surrounded]. Poul Wheverel about half a mile lower, having
a brooke resorting to it. There is on the same side half a mile
[lower] another creke callid Cheilow, alias Chalmansak. There be 4
crekes, (eche of thes crekes hath a broket resorting to them,) on the
south-west side of the haven thus named. Pencastel the first, from the
mouth, 4 miles beneth the bridges, whither shipes do resorte; and here
is a _trajectus_ from the one side of the haven to the other. This is
a mile from the haven mouth, and here the shippes cummunely do ly.
[2.] Caullons, half a mile upward. Then [3.] Mogun, a 2 miles higher,
wher the bridge is, with the broken stone. S. Mogun’s Chirch upon
Mogun Creeke. [4.] Gaire, wher the bridge is, with the causey and one
arch, so that this brekith as a creke out of Mogun.

_S. Mawnoun_ chirch, at the very point of the haven on the side toward
Falmouth, a se marke. Gelling creeke, agayne S. Mawnoun’s on the other
side, hard without the haven mouth. Gilling creke brekith at the hed
into 2 crekes.

_S. Piranes_, alias _Keverine_, wher the sanctuarie was, a mile from
S. Antonies, and not a mile from the main se.

The patronage of _S. Antonies_ longid to Trewardreth. S. Antonies
chirch or chapel beside at ―――― sand. S. Antonies standith in the point
of the land of Gilling creke, and the mouth of Hailford haven. Mr.
_Reskimer_ hath a maner caullid by his own name a mile from Moreden.
There hath bene a fair house, but it felle to ruine in tyme of mynde.
Mr. Reskimer berith in his armes a wolphe. One of the Reskimers gave
land to S. Keverines, for sustentation of certein poore folkes. _S.
Keverine’s_, 2 miles from Gilling creeke, and not a mile from the se.
S. Keverine’s longgid to Bewle Abbay in Hampshir, and had a sanctuarie
privilegid at S. Keverin’s.

From Gaire bridg to _Tremain_, wher Mr. Reskimer now dwellith, a good
mile. This litle house longgid to Tremain, and in tyme of mynde cam by
heire general to one Tretherde. This Tretherde hath, beside, landes
and a praty maner place at ―――― John Reskimer’s mother was Tretherth’s
[daughter.] There is in Devonshir one of the Tremayns a man of fayre
landes.

From Tremayn over Heilford Haven to _Morden_, where Mr. Reskimer hath
a ruinus maner place, and a fair park well woddid; wherof 3 partes is
within the principal streme of the haven, and a creke caullid Poole
Penrith, hemmid yn. Morden [is] in Constentine paroch.

Then I rode half a mile and more from Morden over the fresch water,
that riseth no far distance off yn the hilles, and goith strait into
Poulpenrith creeke. About half a mile farther, I rode over an arme of
the broke that cummith doun to Poulwitheral creeke; and sone after I
rode over the greater arme of the same broke, the salt arme lying in
the bottom hard under it.

Then I rode a 4 miles by morey and rokky ground. And then within the
space of half a mile, I cam to _S. Budocus_ church. This Budocus was
an Irisch man, and cam into Cornewalle, and ther dwellid. A litle from
the chirch there enterid betwixt ij hilles on the shore a short creke
lyke an havenet, but it was barrid.

And a quarter of a mile farther I cam to _Arwennak_, Mr. Keligrewis
place, stonding on the brimme or shore within Falemouth Haven. This
place has been of continuance the auncient house of the Killigrewes.
There was another house of the Keligrewis descending out of this, and
it was in the toun of Penrine. Now both these houses be joynid yn one.

The very point of the haven mouth, being an hille wheron the King hath
builded a castel, is caullid _Pendinant_, and longgith to Mr.
Kiligrewe. It is a mile in cumpace, and is almost environid by the se;
and where it is not, the ground is so low, and the cut to be made so
litle, that it were insulatid. From S. Mawnon to Pendinas by water a 4
miles.

There lyith a litle cape or foreland within the haven, a mile dim.
almost again Mr. Kiligrewis house, called _Penfusis_. Betwixt this
cape and Mr. Kiligrew’s house, one great arme of the haven rennith up
to Penrine toun.

_Penrine_ 3 good miles from the very entery of Falmouth haven, and 2
miles from Penfusis. There dwellith an auncient gentilman, callid
Trefusis, at this point of Penfusis.

_Levine Prisklo_, alias Levine Pole, betwixt S. Budocus and Pendinas;
it were a good haven but for the barre of sande.

The first creke or arme that castith out on the northwest side of
Falemuth, goith up [to] Penrin, and at the ende it brekith into 2
armes, the lesse to the College of Glasenith, i. _viridis nidus_, or
wag-mier, at Penrin; the other to S. Gluvias, the paroch church of
Penrine therby.

Out of eche side of Penrine creke, breaketh out an arme or ever it cum
to Penrin. Stakes and foundation of stone sette in the creeke at
Penrine, afore the toun, a little lower than wher it brekith into
armes. A gap in the midle of the stakes, and a chain.

Good wood about the south and west syde of Penrith. One Walter
[Brounscombe], Bishop of Excestre, made yn a more caullid _Glesnith_,
in the bottom of a park of his at Penrine, a Collegiate chirch, with a
provost, xij prebendaries, and other ministers. This college is
strongly wallid and incastellid, having 3 strong towers and gunnes at
the but of the creke.

Betwixt the point of land of Trefusis, and the point of Restronget
wood, is Milor creek, and there is _S. Milor’s_ church, and beyond the
church is a good rode for shippes. Milor creke goith up a mile. Good
wood in Restronget.

The next creek beyond the point in Stronget Wood is caullid
Restronget, and going ij miles into the land, it brekith into 2 armes;
and _St. [Feock’s]_ Church standith in the land betwixt; and on the
arme is a stone bridg caullid Carr Bridg in the way thens to Truru.
Betwixt Restrongith Creke, and the creke of Truru, be two creekes.
Truru Creeke is next, and goith up a 2 miles creking up from the
principal streme. This creke brekith withyn half a mile of _Truru_,
and castith yn a creke westward by Newham Wood. This creke of Truru,
afore the very toun, is devidid into 2 partes, and eche of them hath a
brook cumming doun, and a bridge, and the toun of Truru betwixt them
both. The White Freres house was on the west arme, yn Kenwyn streate.
Kenwen streat is severid from Truru with this arme; and Clementes
streat by est is seperate on the est side from Truru with the other
arme. One paroche church in Truru self. Kenwen and Clementes streates
hath several chirches, and bere the name of the sainctes of the paroch
chirches. Coynage of tynne at Midsomer and Michelmas at Truru. Truru
is a borow toun and privilegid. Ther is a castelle a quarter of a mile
by west out of Truru, longging to the Earl of Cornwale, now clene
doun. The site therof is now usid for a shoting and playing place. Out
of the body of Truru creke on the est side, brekith a crek estwarde a
mile from Truru, and goith up a mile dim. to Tresilian Bridge of
stone. At the entry and mouth of this creeke is a rode for shippes,
caullid Maples Rode. Here faught a late xviij sail of Marchant
Spaniardes, and 4 shippes of warre of Depe. The Spaniardes chac’d
hither the French men.

A mile and a half above the mouth of Truro Creke, caullid La Moran
Creke, of the church of _S. Moran_. This creke goith into the land a
quarter of a mile from the maine streme of the haven. The mayne
streame goith up 2 miles above Moran creeke, ebbing and flowing; and a
quarter of a mile above is the toune of _Tregony_, _vulgo_ Tregny.
Here is a bridge of stone _aliquot arcuum_ apon Fala ryver. Fala river
riseth a mile or more off Rochehille, and goith by Granborrow, [“Pons
grandis,” i. e. Granpound] wher is a bridge of stone over it.
_Graunpond_, a 4 miles from [Roche,] and 2 litle miles from Tregony.
Mr. Tregyon hath a maner place richely begon and amply, but not endid,
caullid _Wulvedon_, alias Goldoun. Fala ryver, is betwixt Graunpond
and Tregony.

From Tregony to passe doune by the body of the haven of Falamuth, to
the mouth of Lanyhorne creeke or pille on the south-est side of the
haven, is a 2 miles. This creke goith up half a mile from the
principale streame of the haven.

At the hed of this creeke standith the castelle of _Lanyhorne_,
sumtyme a castel of an 8 toures, now decaying for lak of coverture. It
longgid as principal house to the Archedecons. Thes landes descendid
by heires general to the best Corbetes of Shropshir, and to Vaulx of
Northamptonshir. Vaulx part syns bought by Tregyon of Cornewaul. From
Lanyhorne pille is a place or point of land of 40 acres or therabout
as a peninsula, and is caullid _Ardeuerameur_, and is a mile from
Lanyhorne creke; and the water or creke that cummith or rennith into
the south-south-est part is but a litle thyng, as of an half mile. The
creke that hemmith this peninsula up into the land, yn on the
west-south-west side, is the mayn land betwixt Crameur creke and this.

From the mouth of the west creke of this peninsula to S. Juste creeke
a 4 miles or more. From S. Juste pille or creeke to S. Mauditus creeke
is a mile dim.

The point of the land betwixt S. Juste creke and S. Maws is of sum
caullid Pendinas, and on this point stondith, as yn the entery of S.
Maws creek, a castelle or forteres late begon by the king.


  [Vol. iii. p. 46. _Inscriptions made [by Leland] at the request of
     Master Trewry at the Castelle of St. Maw’s._

  Henricus Oct. Rex Angl. Franc. et Hiberniæ invictiss. me posuit
  præsidium Reipubl. terrorem Hostib.

  Imperio Henrici, naves, submittite vela.

  Semper honos, Henrice, tuus laudesque manebunt.

  Edwardus famâ referat factisque parentem.

  Gaudeat Edwardo duce nunc Cornubia felix.]

This creke of S. Maws goith up a 2 myles by est-north-est into the
land, and so far it ebbith and flowith; and ther is a mylle dryven
with a fresch brook that resortith to the creke. Scant a quarter of a
mile from the castel on the same side, upper into the land, is a praty
village or fischar town with a pere, caullid _S. Maw’s_; and there is
a chapelle of hym, and his chaire of stone a little without, and his
welle. They caulle this Sainct there S. Mat ―――― he was a bishop in
Britain, and [was] paintid as a scholemaster.

Half a mile from the hedde of this, downward to the haven, is a creke
in a corner of a poole with a round mark, made in charte, on the which
is a mille grinding with the tyde. A mile beneth that, on the south
side enterythe a creke half a mile, and this is barrid by a smaul sand
banke from the main sea. A mile beneth this, and almost agayn S. Maw,
a creeke or poole goynge up a litle in ―――― at the but of this is a myle.
And a celle of S. Antone longging to Plympton Priory, and here, of
late dayes, lay 2 chanons of Plympton Priory.

All the crekes of Fala welle woddid.

From S. Antonies Point at the mayn se to Penare Point a 3 miles dim.

_Grefe_ Islet lyith scant half a mile est of Penare, wherein breadeth
gullis and other se foules. This Grefe lyith north from the Forne, a
point or foreland in Britain, bytwene the wich is the entery of the
sleve of the ocean. And betwixt Forne and Grefe is a v. kennynges; and
here is _breviss. trajectus_ by estimation from Cornewaulle into
Britaines continent.

About a myle by west of Penare is a forte nere the shore in the paroch
of _S. Geron’s_. It is a single dikyd, and within a but shot of the
north side of the same apperith an hole of a vault broken up by a
plough yn tylling. This vault had an issue from the castelle to the
se. And a litle by north of the castelle a 4 or 5 borowes or cast
hilles. A mile dim. from this there is another in the syde of an hille
―――― a quarter ―――― from the lordship of ―――― thy, sumtyme the
Archdekens, now Corbettes and Tregions.

Dudeman Foreland or Point is about a 3 miles from Grefe. No wood on
the very cost from S. Antonies Point to Dudeman. Inward yn the land is
some woode ―――― This chapelle land or point is in the park of _Bodrugan_;
and yn this park was the house of Sir Henry Bodrugan, a man of
auncient stok, atteyntid for takyng part with King Richard the 3 agayn
Henry the 7; and after flying into Ireland, Syr Richard Eggecomb,
father to Sir Pers Eggecombe, had Bodrigan and other parcelles of
Bodrigan’s landes. And Trevagnon had part of Bodrigan’s landes, as
Restronget and Newham, both in Falamuth Haven.

From Chapel land to _Pentowen_, a sandy bay, witherto fischar bootes
repair for a socour, a 2 myles. Here issuith out a praty ryver that
cummith from _S. Austelles_, about a 2 miles dim. off. And there is a
bridge of stone of the name of the town. This ryver rennith under the
west side of the hille, that, the poore toun of S. Austelles stondith
on. At S. Austelles is nothing notable but the paroch chirch.

From Pentowen to the Blake Hedd a mile. There is a fair quarre of whit
fre-stone on the shore betwixt Pentowen and Blak Hed, whereof sum be
usid in the inward partes of S. Mawe’s forteresse. The residew of
morstone and slate. And Pendinas Castelle is of the same stone except
the wallinge.

And in the cliffes between the Blak Hed and Tywartraith Bay is a
certeyn cave, wheryn apperith thinges lyke images gilted. And also in
the same cliffes be vaynis of metalles as coper and other.

There is, a mile from the entery of Tywartraith Bay up yn the land at
the but ende of it, a paroch chirch of _S. Blase_, and ther is a new
bridge of stone of the sainctes name over a broke that ther cummith
into the bay.

_Tywardreth_, a praty toun but no market, lyith a quarter of a myle
from the est side of the bay. Ther is a paroch chirch, and ther was a
priory of blak monkes, a celle sumtyme to a house in Normandy. Sum say
Campernulphus was founder of this priory. Sum say that Cardinham was
founder. Arundale of Lanhern was of late taken for founder. I saw a
tumbe in the west part of the chirch of the priori, with this
inscription:

     Hæc est Tumba Roberti filii Wilihelmi.

This Robert Fitz William was a man of fair landes _tempore Edwardi 3.
reg. Ang._

From Tywardreth toun to _Fawey_ town a ij miles. The point of land on
the est side of Tywardreth Bay is caullid Penarth Point. From Penarth
to the haven mouth of Fawey is a 2 miles. Ther is at the west point of
the haven of Fawey Mouth a blok house devised by Thomas Treury,[50]
and made partely by his cost, partely by the town of Fawey. A litle
higher on this point of the hille is a chapel of S. Catarine. And hard
under the roote of this hille a litle withyn the haven mouth, is a
litle bay or creke bering the name of Catarine.

About a quarter of a mile upper on this the west side of Fawey haven
is a square toure of stone for defence of the haven, made about King
Edward the 4. tym; and litle above this tower on the same side is
_Fawey_ Town, lying alonge the shore, and builded on the side of a
great slatey rokkid hille. In the midle of the toun apon the shore
self is a house buildid quadrantly in the haven, which shadowith the
shippes in the haven above it from 3 partes of the haven mouth, and
defendith them from stormes. The name of the toun of Fawey is in
Cornisch Conwhath. It is set on the north side of the haven, and is
set hangging on a maine rokky hille, and is in length about a quarter
of a mile. The towne longgid to one Cardinham, a man of great fame,
and he gave it to Tywartraith Priorie, of the which sum say that
Cardinham was founder; sum say Campernulph of Bere. But at this gift
Fawey was but a smaul fischar toun. The paroch chirch of Fawey is of
S. Fimbarrus, and was impropriate to the priorie of Tywartraith. The
glorie of Fawey rose by the warres in King Edward the first and the
thirde and Henry the v. day, partely by feates of warre, partely by
pyracie, and so waxing riche felle al to marchaundice, so that the
town was hauntid with shippes of diverse nations, and their shippes
went to all nations. The shippes of Fawey sayling by Rhie and
Winchelsey, about Edward the 3. tyme, wold vale no bonet beyng
requirid; wherapon Rhy and Winchelsey men and they faught, when Fawey
men had victorie, and therapon bare the armes mixt with the armes of
Rhy and Winchelsey, and then rose the name of the ‘Gallaunts of
Fawey.’ The French men diverse tymes assailid this town, and last most
notably about Henry the vj. tyme, when the wife of Thomas Treury the
2. with her men repellid the French out of her house in her
housebandes absence. Wherapon, Thomas Treury buildid a right fair and
stronge embatelid tower in his house, and embateling all the waulles
of the house, in a maner made it a castelle, and onto this day it is
the glorie of the town building in Faweye. In Edwarde the 4. day, 2.
stronge towers were made a litle beneth the town, one on eche side of
the haven, and a chayne to be drawen over. When warre in Edward the 4
dayes seasid bytwene the French men and Englisch, the men of Fawey,
usid to pray [spoil], kept their shippes and asaillid the Frenchmen in
the sea agayn King Edwardes commandement; wherapon the capitaines of
the shippes of Fawey were taken and sent to London, and Dertemouth men
commaunded to fetche their shippes away, at which tyme Dertmouth men
toke them in Fawy, and toke away, as it is said, the great chein that
was made to be drawen over the haven from towre to towre.

From Fawey town end by north in the haven is Chagha mille pille, a
litle uppeward on the same side. A good mile above Chagha mille pille
is on this west side Bodmyn pille, having [a landing place] for wares,
then to be caried to Bodmyn.

A quarter of a mile from Bodmyn creek mouth up into the haven on the
same side is _Gullant_ a fischar tounlet.

From Gullant to Lantian pille or creek about half a mile: it goith up
but a litle into the land. _Lantiant_ lordship longid to the Erle of
Saresbyri. Barret, a man of mene landes, dwellith bytwixt Gullant and
Lantient pille.

From Lantiant pille to Bloughan pille or creke nere a mile; it crekith
up but a litle.

From Bloughan to _Lostwithiel_ scant a mile on the principal streame
of Fawey river. It hath ebbid and flowen above Lostwithiel; but now it
flowith not ful to the toun. In Lostwithiel is the shir haul of
Cornewaul. Therby is also the coynege haul for tynne. The town is
privilegid for a borow; and there is wekely a market on Thursday.
_Richardus Rex Rom. comes Cornubiæ_ privilegid this town. The paroch
chirch is of S. Barptolome. There comithe a broket from west throghe
the side of Lostwithiel, and goith est into Fawey ryver, dividinge
Penknek from Lostwithiel.

Penknek is yn Lanleverey paroch.

Carteis, a gentleman of almost an 100 mark land, dwellith betwyxt
Bloughan and Penknek by Lostwithiel.

The park of _Restormel_ is hard by the north side of the town of
Lostwithiel. Tynne workes in this parke. Good woode in this parke.
Ther is a castel on an hil in this park, wher sumtymes the Erles of
Cornewal lay. The base court is sore defacid. The fair large dungeon
yet stondith. A chapel cast out of it, a newer work then it, and now
onrofid. A chapel of the Trinite in the park, not far from the
castelle.

The castel of _Cardinham_, a 4. miles or more by north from
Lostwithiel. To this castelle longith many knightes services. Arundale
of Lanherne. The Lord Souch, Compton and ―――― partith Cairdinham’s
landes.

The ryver of Fawey risith in Fawey more about a 2. miles from
Camilford by south, in a very wagmore in the side of an hil. Thens to
Draynesbridge, of flat more stones. Thens to Clobham bridg, drownid
with sand, ij miles and more. Thens to Lergen bridge of 2 or 3 arches,
a mile lower. Thens to Newbridg of stone archid, a 2 miles. Thence to
Resprin bridge of stone archid, alias Laprin, about 2 miles. Thens to
Lostwithiel bridge of five arches, two miles. A litle above
Lostwithiel bridge of stone, the ryver of Fawey brekith into 2 armes;
wherof at this day the lesse goith to the ston bridge, the bigger to a
wodde bridge even again[st] and but a litle way of from the stone
bridge; and after a praty way lower the armes cum again to one botom.
The great part of Fawey water is by policie turnid from the ston bridg
for choking of it, and for to put the sande of from the botom of the
toun. The stone bridge, in tyme of memorie of men lyving, was of
arches very depe to the sight; the sande is now cum to within a 4 or 5
feete of the very hedde of them. The sande that cummith from tynne
workes is a great cause of this, and yn tyme to cum shaul be a sore
decay to the hole haven of Fawey. Barges as yet cum with marchanties
within half a mile of Lostwithiel.

From Lostwithiel doun along Fawey ryver to _S. Winnous_, an abbate
chirch, a good myle. By the wich chirch of old tyme enhabitid a
gentilman, _Joannes de S. Winnoco_. After the Lordes Hastinges wer
owners of it; and then sold to Guiliam Loures gret-grandfather now
lyving. This Lower hath to wife one of the 2 daughters of Thomas
Treury. By this chirch is a warfe to make shippes by. Much good wood
at S. Ginokes, and on the other side of the haven agayn it. From S.
Guinows chirch to the point of S. Winows wood, half a mile. Here goith
yn a salt crek half a mile on the est side of the haven, and at the
hed of it is a bridge caulled Lerine bridge, and the creke berith also
the name of Lerine.

At the north side of this Lerine creke, almost at the hedd, is
_Teuthey_, Laurence Courteneis house. It longgid ons to Stonnard, sins
to Cayle, and now last to the Courteneis of the house of Devonshir
descendinge. From Lerine creke to S. Carac pille or creeke, about half
a mile lower on the said est side of the haven; it goith a mile dim.
up into the land.

In midle of this creke on the north side was a litle celle of Saint
Cyret and Julette, longging to Montegue Priory. From the mouth of S.
Carak pille to Poulmorlande pille about a mile. It goith scant a
quarter of a mile up into the lande, and at the hedde goith into 2
armes.

From the mouth of Poulmorlande to _Bodenek_ village half a mile, wher
the passage is to Fawey, and from ―――― Mr. Mohun hath a maner place,
caullid the Haul, on an hil above this village.

From Bodenek to Pelene Point a quarter of a mile, and here enterith a
pille or creeke half a mile up into the land.

At the hed of this pille is a chapel of _St. Wilow_, and by it is a
place caullid Lamelin, lately longging to Lamelin, now to Trelauny by
heir general. Trelauny’s house is at Meneheneth by Liscard. On the
south side of this creke is the paroch church, caullid _Lanteglise
juxta Fawey_, being the paroch chirch of Bodenek and Poulruan. From
the mouth of this creke to _Poulruan_, a good fischar town, a quarter
of a mile. And at this Poulruan toun is a tower of force, marching
again the tower on Fawey side. Ther was ons, as it is said, a chaine
to go over the haven from tower to toure. The haven mouth of Fawey is
a 2 bow shottes of.

The very point of land at the est side of the mouth of this haven, is
caullid Pontus crosse, _vulgo_ Paunch crosse.

From Lostwithiel to _Castledour_, now clene doun, 3 good miles by
plentiful ground of corn and grasse. Castledour longgid to the Erle of
Sarisbyri.

A mile of is a broken crosse thus inscribed, CONOMOR ET FILIUS CUM
DOMINA CLUSILLA.

From Pontus Crosse to _Poulpirrhe_ about a six miles, wher is a little
fischar toun and a peere, with a very litle creke and a broke. Ther is
a crikket betwixt Poulpirrhe and Low. From Poulpirrhe to Low creke dry
at half ebbe a 2 miles. On eche side of the entery of this creke is a
toun, the one caullid Est Low, the other West Low.

_Est Low_ is a praty market toun. There is a great bridge of a 12
archis over Low creke, to go from the one toun of Low to the other.
Good wood about Low creke.

Ther is a maner place caullid _Trelaun_ about this Low creke, sumtyme
Bonvilles, now the Marquise of Dorsetes. Salmon taken yn this creke.
Kendale and Code, gentilmen, dwelle yn Morel paroche on the est syde
of this creke.

From Low creeke to Seton bridge of stone of a 2 archis, and Setoun
ryver a 3 miles.

From Seton to Ramehed, about a 9 miles.

From Fawey over the haven to _Bodenek_, a fischar town, wherby Mr.
Mohun hath a manor place.

Thens a 5 miles by very pleasaunt inclosid ground prately wooddid,
plentiful of corn and grasse.

Then a 3 miles by mory and hethy ground.

Then 2 miles by hilly and woddy ground to Liscard.

About half a mile or 1 cam to Liskard, I passid in a wood by a chapel
of owr Lady, caullid “our Lady in the Park,” wher was wont to be gret
pilgrimage. This chapelle of ease longgith to Liskard, and so doth 2
or 3 more.

_Liskard_ stondith on rokky hilles, and is the best market town at
this day in Cornwaul, saving Bodmin. In this toun the market is kept
on Monday. The paroch chirch is of S. Martin, stondith on an hil, and
is a fair large thing. The personage is impropriate to ――――. Ther was a
castel on an hille in the toun side, by north from S. Martin. It is
now al in ruine. Fragments and peaces of waulles yet stond. The site
of it is magnificent and looketh over al the toun. This castelle was
the Erles of Cornwaul. It is now usyd somtym for a pound of cattell.
This towne knowledgith fredom and privileges by the gift of Richard
King of Romanes, and Erle of Cornewaul. Ther is a goodly conduct in
the midle of the town very plentiful of water to serve the town.

From Liskard to Fowey 10.

From Liskard to Launstoun 12 miles.

From Liskard to Lostwithiel 10.

From Liskard to Bodmin 10.

From Liskard to Low Market 7.

From Liskard to S. Germanes a 6 miles.

From Liskard to Plymmouth a 12 miles.

Cumming out of Liskarde, about half a mile, I left _Cortyder_, a
goodly lordship and an old maner place, on the right hond; it is a
hunderith pounde by the yere. This is now fawllen onto heir-general in
partition. Cotyder, and the lordship of Tregelley, now caullid
Minheneth lordship, longgid (as Mr. Trelawney told me) to one Heling
or Eling. Cotyder cam after hime, therof named Cotyder ―――― had male
―――― and Cotyder, now Beket hath Cotyder self ――――. Corington and
another of them had ――――.

From Liskard to _Minheneth_ 2 miles, wher is a fair large old chirch.
The personage of it is impropriate to ――――. From Mynhenet to the ruines
of Bodulcan’s place a 2 miles. The maner of Minheneth was sumtime
caullid Tregelly, wherof the name and sum ruines yet remaine.
Trelawney now lyving, is the 4. of that name that hath be lord of
Minheneth. Ther was one Sir John Trelawney, sn auncient gentilman,
father to the first Trelawney of Minheneth, but be likelihod he had an
elder sun; for Trelawney now living hath none of the landes, but it is
descendid to heires generales.

Half a mile off, a great brooke, after the course of a 4 miles,
resorting to Liner and S. Germanes creke a this side S. Germanes.

Another broket a quarter of a mile beyond, that resortith to the
other.

Thens to Natter Bridge of 2 or 3 archis, 4 miles. It stondith on Liner
Ryver. This ryver, as far as I could lerne, riseth by north-est up
towardes the quarters of Launstoun.

The soile betwixt Minheneth and Natter bridge very good and enclosid,
and metely wel woddyd. From Natter bridge to S. Germanes about a 2
miles.

The town of _S. Germanes_ on the side of Liner as I came to this
bridge. S. Germanes is but a poore fischar town. The glory of it
stoode by the priory. S. Germanes stondith about a 3 miles in Liner
creke from the mayne strond of Tamar haven.

From Liner bridge to _Asche_ aboute a 4 miles by much like grounde.
Asche is a praty market toun, and is set from the toppe of a rokky
hille, as by west to the roote of the same, and very shore of Tamar
haven by este. The tounes men use boothe marchandise and fischar. Thir
is a chapel of ease in Asche. The paroch chirch is caullid _S.
Stephan’s_, about half a mile off by south, the personage wherof is
impropriate to Windesore College.

By S. Stephanes, and in S. Stephanes paroch is the graunt and auncient
castelle of _Tremertoun_, apon a rokky hille, wherof great peaces yet
stond, and especially the dungeon. The ruines now serve for a prison.
Great libertees long to this castelle. The Valetortes, men of great
possession, wer owners, and, as far as I can gather, builders of this
castel, and owners and lordes of the toun of Aische.

These crekes I notid on the west side of Tamar. Fyrst, I markid in
sight above Asche toun, a 2 miles or more, the principal arme of Tamar
haven going up into the land about a 10 miles from that place to
Caulstoke bridge, witherto it almost ebbith and flowith. And shippes
cum up within a mile of this bridg to a place caullid Morleham. And
this place is but a 3 miles from Tavestoke. Tavestoke is countid to be
but 10 miles from Asche to go the next way. Betwixt the 2 miles from
Asche to the mayne arme of Tamar in sight I markid, descending in the
haven, 3 crekes breking out into the land, wherof the first lyith by
north-west creking up into the land. The second lyith west-north-west.
The 3 plaine west, and this crekid to the land scant half a mile.
Scant a mile lower lyith Liner creke, goyng up onto S. Germanes.

The toune of Asch stondith bytween these 2 crekes. Then brekith a
litle creke out caullid John’s or Antony. And at the mouth, about S.
Nicholas, brekith in a creek goyng up to _Milbrok_, 2 miles up in land
from the mayn haven. This Milbrok is a riche fischar toun.

Penle, a fore land, lyith 3 miles lower from this creke into the ――――.
And the promontorie of Ramehed a mile lower.

_Morwel_, the Abbat of Tavestok house, about a mile from Morleham.

Tamar a litle from Morwelle.

From Tavestok to Greston bridge a 6 miles, and then a 3 miles to
Launston.

Tamar a 2 miles and more from Tavestok.

Calstok bridge, or New Bridge, two miles from Milbrok, the first
creeke. S. John the next. Liner the 3. The 4 a litle above Aische. The
5 without fail is the maine streame of Tamar.

From Reddon the land lying south-west on S. Nicholas Isle to Cair
Grene, wher Tamar turnith west a 6 miles. Tamar, going a mile west,
for the most part after goith north.

Creekes from the mouth of Plym and Tamar upon the est side of the
haven.――The Mylle bay. The Stone-house creke. Kaine place creke, wher
is a maner place of Mr. Wise’s. The creeke ―――― having a mille at the
hed, it is in lenght a 2 miles. A 4 mile upper, a creke going up to
Mr. Budokes side, wher is his manor place, and _S. Budok_ chirch. Ther
dwellith by this creke also Copston of Warley, a man of xx C. markes
of lande as it is saide. Then is the uppermost, wher Tave water
cummith onto Tamar. And on the est side of this creeke is Bukland. And
on the west side is Bere, wher the Lord Brokes house and park was.
Bere is a mile from the creke mouthe. Bukland is a two miles from the
creke mouthe. The towne of Plymmouth is about a 3 miles from the
passage of Asche. The _trajectus_ self at Asch half a mile.

The ground betwixt the Passage and Plymmouth hath good corn but litle
wood. Perse Eggecombe had a manor by Ramehed. Perse Eggecombe hath a
goodly house in Cornwalle on Tamar at the mouth of Plimmouth haven.


THE MYDDEL PART OF CORNEWALE. (Vol. vii. fol. 117.)

By the ryver of Tamar from the hedde north-north-est yssuyng owt
towarde the sowthe, the contery being hilly, ys fertile of corne and
gresse, with sum tynne warkes wrougth by violens of water.

Hengiston, beyng a hy hylle and nere Tamar, yn the est part, baryn of
his self, yet is fertile by yelding of tynne both be water and dry
warkes.

The myddel of Cornewale to the est part hy montaynes, rochel ground,
very baren, with sum tynne warkes yn them.

Cornewal thoroughowt from the east part to the west, nerer to the
north part then to the sowth, ys hy montaynes baren ground. Fruteful
from Launston to Bodman, yn a drye somer good for pasturage for catel,
wyth sum tynne werkes.

Looke for Dosmery Poole almost by S. Annes hille.

From Bodman to Redruthe village, nerer to the north se then to the
sowth, be by montaynes, baren also, yelding bare pasture and tynne.

From Redruth to Carne Godolghan the contery ys hylly, very baren of
gresse, and plenteful of tynne.

From Lanant to S. Juste, alias Justinian, beyng the very west poynt of
al Cornewayle, the north part ys montaynes and baren growne, but
plenteful of tynne. The very west poynt, as yt is cawled now in
Cornysch, ys Penwolase, id est _infimum caput_.


THE NORTH PART OF CORNEWALE.

Fro Stratton, not very far from the hedde of Tamar, to Padstow, the
contery by the north se ys rather hylle then montaynenius, and is very
fertile of gras and corne. And the clives of the sayd northe se,
betwne the places aforesayd, hath good fyne blew slates, apt for howse
kyveryng, and also hath diverse vaynes of leade and other metalles not
yet knowen.

Also abowt Camelford ar certen old mynes, wrought yn tymes past, but
of what metalle yt ys now onknowen. Withyn a myle above that poore
village sowth, runneth the ryver that goyth ynto the Severn Se at
Paddistow, and it is the greatest ryver on the north side of
Cornewale, and ys cawled yn the commune spech there Dunmere, and yn
the Kyngges grawnt of privilege to the Chanons of Bodmynne, and the
burgeses of the same towne, Alan, yt may fortune for Alaune. Sum
historyes cawl it Cablan. By this ryver Arture fawght his last field,
yn token whereof the people fynd there yn plowyng, bones and harneys.

Wythyn iiii. myles of the sayd Camylford, apon the north clif ys
_Tintagel_, the which castel had be lykekod iii. wardes, wherof ii. be
woren away with gulfyng yn of the se, insomuch that yt hath made ther
almost an isle, and no way ys to enter ynto hyt now but by long elme
trees layde for a bryge; so that now withoute the isle rennith alonly
a gate howse a walle, and a fals braye dyged and wallid. In the isle
remayne old walles, and in the est part of the same, the ground beyng
lower, remayneth a walle embateled, and men alyve saw theryn a postern
dore of yren. Ther is in the isle a prety chapel, with a tumbe on the
left syde. Ther ys also yn the isle a welle, and ny by the same ys a
place hewen owt of the stony grownd to the length and brede of a man.
Also ther remayneth yn the isle a grownd quadrant-walled as yt were a
garden plot. And by this walle appere the ruines of a vault. The
ground of this isle now nuryshyth shepe and conys.

_Paddistow_, a haven towne of one paroch of fysscher men, wher shyppes
cum not yn but at the flowyng water. The grownd by the se cost from
Paddestow to Saynct Anne’s Hille, wheron ys no maner of buylding, the
ground sumwhat hilly ys fruteful of corn and gresse, but with lytle
tynne.

In the est part of Paddestow haven be ii ―――― [ro]kketes that ―――― yth
se ――――. The est ―――― ys cawled ―――― tyre, and so ys the land that
lyeth agaynst yt.

Apon an viii myles from Paddestou ys a lytle howse of canons secular,
cawled _Crantoke_.

Fro Sainct Anne’s Hil to _Lanant_, a village, the contery by the north
se ys sumwhat hilly, sanday, and baren, and yn sundery places of the
same, wel replenyshed with tynne.

By Conarton cummith a rywer, cawllid Dour Conor, and goith to the se,
not far from Lanant ryver mouth.

From Lanant by the north se to _S. Just_, alias _Justinian_, wher ys
no thyng but a paroch chirch and divers sparkeled [_i. e._ scattered]
howses at the west poynt of the shore, cawlid ――――.

In the mouth of the ryver that cummyth by Lanant ys the rokket
Godryve, wheryn bredith se fowle.

The ground ys but baren, but yt hath yn divers places good tynne
warkes.

By al the north se yn Cornewale be sundry crekes, wher as smawle
fisshers’ bootes be drawne up to dry land, and yn fayr wether the
inhabitans fysche with the same.

At Paddestow Haven, Lanant, and S. Ives, the balinggars and shyppes ar
saved and kept for al weders with keyes or peres.

_Dosmery Poole_, stonding yn the east part of the same, sumwhat toward
the sowth, is of lenght by estimation ii. arow shottes, and of bredth
one, stonding on a hille, yn the est part of the which poole ys a vale
of xiiii. or xv. fadome depe by estimation, and owt of this poole
issueth a ryver, the which runnyng by the space of a myle and a dim.
ys of ii. fadome deep, and is cawled Depe Hatche. Looke wher he
issueth ynto the se.

Also yn the sayd hilly grownd and mooresch be redde deere, the wich
when they be schafed take the sayde poole for soyle.

Ther be of the _Isles of Scylley_ CXLVII, that bare gresse (besyde
blynd rokkettes) and they be by estimation a xxx myles from the west
part of Cornewale. In the byggest isle of the Scylleys, cawled S.
Nicholas Isle, ys a litle pyle or fortres, and a paroch chyrche, that
a monke of Tavestoke yn peace doth serve as a membre to Tavestoke
Abbay. Ther be yn that paroch abowt a lx. howseholdes. Ther is one
isle of the Scylleys cawled Rat Isle, yn the which be so many rattes,
that yf horse or any other lyving beast be browght thyther they devore
hym. Ther is another cawled Bovy Isle. Ther is another cawled
Inisschawe, that is to sey the Isle of Elder, by cause it berith
stynkkyng elders. There be wild bores or swyne.

From S. Just to Newlin eastward the grownd ys sumwhat hilly and
fertyle of gresse, with tynne werkes both weete and dry, without havyn
or creeke, savyng yn dyvers places ther remayne capstaynes, lyke
engins as shyppes doth way ther ancres by, wherwith they draw ther
bootes up to dry land, and fisch but yn fayr wether.

Also yn the sowth-west poynt betwyxt S. Just and Newlyn ys a poynt or
a promontory almost envyronid with the se, wheryn ys nothyng but as yt
were a hil enclustered with rokkes as yt had bene yn tymes past a
castel, (Castel Treuyne) and for the declaration therof there remayne
yet toward the land ii. wardes clene fawllen downe, but the stones of
them remayne ther very fayre and well quadrated. The ruine of the
fortelet yn the poynt ys at thys day a hold irrecuperable for the fox.

Ther lyith betwixt the sowth west and Newlyn a myle or more off the
se, _S. Buryens_, a sanctuary, wherby, as nere to the chyrch, be not
above viii. dwellyng howses. Ther longeth to S. Buryens a deane and a
few prebendarys, that almost be nether [never?] ther. And S. Buryens
ys a iiii. myles fro the very sowth-west poynt.

_Newlin_ ys a poore fischar towne, and hath alonly a key for shippes
and bootes, with a lytle socur of land water. Within a arow shoot of
the sayd key or pere, lyith directly a lytle low island, with a chapel
yn yt. And this lytle islet bereth gresse.

_Mowsehole_ ys a praty fyschar town yn the west part of Montes-bay,
lying hard by the shoore, and hath no savegarde for shyppes, but a
forced pere. Also yn the bay be est the same towne ys a good roode for
shyppes, cawled Gnaves Lake.

_Pensants_, abowt a myle fro Mowsehole, stonding fast in the shore of
Mont-bay, ys the westest market towne of al Cornwayle, and no socur
for botes or shyppes, but a forsed pere or key. Ther is but a chapel
yn the sayd towne as ys yn Newlyn. For theyr paroche chyrches be more
then a myle off.

_Marhasdeythyou_, [_Marketjew_,] alias _forum Jovis_, ys a fischar
towne, with a market, and standeth fast apon the shore of the bay,
directly agaynst the foote of S. Michael’s Mont northward.

In Marhasdeythyow ys but a poore chapel yn the mydde of the poore
town, and a lytle chapel yn the sand nere by the towne toward the
Mont. Be the west end of the towne ys a lake, or a _rivulus_, the
hedde wherof risith withyn a myle of Lanant northwordde fro
Marhesdeythyou. Betwyxt the hedd of this _rivulus_ and the nerest part
of the ryver of Heyle, that cummeth yn to the se at Lanant is not a
myle. And the grownd of bred [breadth] betwene the ful se marke at
_forum Jovis_, and the ful se marke of Lanant ryver, is not ii. myles.

The cumpace of the roote of the mont of _S. Michael_ is not dim. myle
abowt. The sowth-sowth-est part of the mont is pasturable and breedith
conys. The resydue hy and rokky. In the north-north-est ys a garden
with certen howses with shoppes for fischar men. The way to the
chyrche enteryth at the north syd from half heb to half fludde to the
foote of the mont, and so ascendeth by steppes and greces westward,
and thens returneth estward to the utter ward of the chyrch. Withyn
the sayd ward is a court strongly walled, wheryn on the sowth syde is
the chapel of S. Michael, and yn the east syde a chapel of our Lady.
The capytaynes and prestes lodginges be yn the sowth syde, and the
west of S. Mich. chapel. The Mont is enclosid with the se fro dim.
flud to dim. ebbe; otherwyse men may cum to the Mont afoote. Ther be
found from the inward part of the ―――― yvers ―――― re stones ―――― wes
and ―――― ois v miles ―――― the se. In the bay betwyxt the Mont and
Pensants be fownd neere the lowe-water marke rootes of trees yn dyvers
places, as a token of the grownde wasted. The cumpace of the bay ys
from Lyzart poynt to Newlyn abowt a xx. myles.

Wythyn iii. myles of Lyzart Poynt ys a lytle isle withyn the bay,
cawled _Inispriuen_, and conteyneth ii. acres of grownd, wheryn be
byrddes and conies. The ground fro Newlin to Loo Poole by the sowth se
ys not very fertile, but hath good tynne workes. Fro the poynt of
Lyzart to Hayleford haven the grownd is fertile of corn and gresse by
the sowth se. Also wythyn iii. myles of the sowth se betwene Haylford
and the est syde of Montes-bay is a wyld moore, cawled _Gunhilly_, i.
e. hilly hethe, wher ys brood of catayle. Also yn the west syde of the
poynt of Hayleford haven, and withyn the land of Meneke or Menegland,
is a paroch chirch of _S. Keveryn_, otherwis Piranus; and ther is a
sanctuary with x. or xii. dwelling howses, and therby was a sel [cell]
of monkes, but now goon home to ther hed hows. The ruines of the
monastery yet remenith.

Wythyn ii myles of the hedde of the ful se marke of Heyle ryver ys
_Heylston_, a market town, withyn the which ther is a cowrt for the
coynage of tynne kept twys yn the yeer. Yn the town is both a chapel
and a paroch, and yet apperith in the town _vestigia castelli_ yn the
west part. And a ryver runnyng under the same _vestigia_ of the castel
yssueth toward the sowthe see, stopped ther with sowth-est wyndes
casting up sandes maketh a poole cawled Loo, of an arow shot yn brede,
and a ii. myle in cumpas yn the somer; in the wynter, by reason of
fluddes, flowing to Heylston toun; wherby the mylles ner Heylston
beyng stopped, men be constrayned to cut the sandy banke betwyxt the
mowth of the poole and the se, wherby the water may have yssne, and
the mylles grynd, by the which gut so opened, the se floweth and
ebbeth yn to the poole, wherby se fysch enteryng with a sowth-est
winde ys closed yn the poole, the gut beyng agayn choked and fylled
with sand, and so after taken with trowtes and eles drawen yn the same
poole.

The cowntery fro Newlyn to Heylston ys meetely fertyle of gresse and
corn, and plentuus of tynne by the sowth se. Fro the mowthe of
Heylford to Falemuth be water ys iiii. myles.

_Falemuth_ ys a havyn very notable and famose, and yn a maner the most
principale of al Britayne; for the chanel of the entre hath be space
of ii. myles ynto the land xiiii. fadum of depes, which communely ys
caullyd Caryk-rood, by cawse yt ys a sure herboro for the greatest
shyppes that travayle be the ocean. At the entre of the haven lyith a
blynd roke covered at ful see nerer the west side of the haven then
the east, cawled Caregroyne, i. e. _Insula vel rupes potius vitulorum
marinorum_, alias Seeles. Seles when they cast theyr calves, they cum
to lond, and lay theyr _fœtum_ in a dry banke, the which they may com
to, and ther they suffer theyr _fœtum_ to tary a whyle or they bring
hym to the se. In the est syde of the sayde haven entereth a creek
flowing by the space of ii. myles ynto land, and ys fed at the hedde
with fresche water. Apon the sowthe syde of this creke ys a selle
longing to the howse of Plymton, cawled _S. Antony’s_, having but ii.
chanous. On the very north shoore of the sayd creeke towardo the
havyn’s mowth ys a poor fischar village, called _S. Mausa_, alias la
Vausa; and nygh to this village toward the same haven ys a fortelet
lately buylded by the contery for the defens of the haven. In the west
syde of the haven is a creeke that flowith up fro the haven’s mowth
ynto the land above iii. myles, at the very hedd of the which standeth
a prety town of marchandyse and vytayle market. Withyn the towne ys a
colleg wel walled and dyked defensabley cawled S. Thomas, wher be
seculer chanons and a provost. Also yn the towne ys a chapel, and a
quarter of a myle owt of the town ys the paroch chyrch; also viii.
myles and more above the sayd haven’s mowth is a market towne
est-north-est, cawled _Trureu_, wheryn is a mayre, and also coynag for
tynne, with a paroch chyrch and a blake freers. Also on the sowth-est
syde, at the hedde of the olde ful-se marke of Falemuth, is a market
toune xii myles. and more up ynto land, cawled _Tregoney_, wheryn is
an old castel and a paroch chyrch of S. James, standing in a more by
the castel, also a ch[apel?] standing yn the myddes of the towne; and
at the est end of the town a paroch chyrche.

_S. Austol’s_, a poore village with a paroche chyrch, is vi. myles
east fro Tregoney.

_Trewardreth_ Bay hath at the hedde on the est side a poore village
with a paroche chyrch, and a priory yn the same town of Cluny monkes.

From Falemuth to Trewardreth by the sowth se the ground is metely
fertyle of corn and gresse, and no tyn werkes from Falemuth to Dudman
Foreland.

In the mydde way betwene Falemuth and Dudman is an islet or roke
beryng gresse, cawled _Grefe_, a ii. acres about, but standyng yn the
myddes torring upright. Ther bredeth yn the isle se fowle.

Fro Dudman Foreland to Trewardreth, the contre sumwhat baren of gresse
and corne, and replenishid with tynne werkes, with vaynes yn the se
clyves of coper. From Trewardreth to Fowey town ys ii. myles. Bytwene
thes townes by the sowth se ther is plenty of corn and gresse, but no
tynne werkes.

The town of _Fowey_ ys a market town, walled defensably to the se
cost, and hath gates also. Yn the town is but one chyrche, but the
howses of the towne be well buylded of stone and yl enhabited. Also at
the entery of the haven on the west syd is a blokke howse and a chapel
of S. Catarine, be the same. Also ther is on the same syd a towre with
ordenans for defens of the haven.

On the west syde, a ii. myles up yn the haven, ys a fyssher towne
cawled _Gullant_.

At the hedd of the ful se marke of this haven, and a quarter of a mile
more, is the toune of _Lostwhythyel_, havyng a market, and ys the
shyre towne of Cornewal. For ther the shyre is kept by the shryfe ons
yn the moneth. Also at this town is quynag of tynne twys a yere. And
by the shyre hawle appere ruines of auncyent buyldinges. It is
evydently knowen that yt hath flowed to Lostwhythiel; but the spuing
of the sandes of the tynne werkes hath stoppe yt now. The litle rownd
castel of _Restormel_ standith in the kinges parke ny to Lostwithiel.
At the est syde of the haven’s mowth of Fowey stondith a towr for the
defens therof, and a chapel of S. Savyor a lytle above the same. Ny by
the sayd towr standith a fysshar village, cawled _Polruan_.

A myle beyond Polruen on the est syde of the same haven, stondith a
poore fisshar village, caullid _Bodennek_, Ther is the passage or
_trajectus_ to Fowey.

ii. myles above Bodennek ynto the land northward is a creke apon the
north syde, wheryn ys a sel of ii. blake monkes of Montegu, and is
dedicat to S. Sirice and Julit.

By est the haven of Fowey apon a iiii. myles ys a smawle creke, cawled
_Poul Pier_, and a symple and poore village apon the est syde of the
same, of fisshar men, and the bootes ther fishing by, saved by a peere
or key.

In the est syde also of this Poul Pyrre, ii. myles of, is another
creke cawled Loow, being but a tyde creke. For at low water benethe
the bridge a man may both wade and ryde over in the somer. Ther is on
eyther side of this smaule creke a smaule fissher villag hard on the
se shore, the one cawlled _Est_ and the other _West Loow_, Est Loowe
being a market towne, and yn eyther of them a chapel. Also yn the
sayde creekes mouth, neere sumwhat to the sowthe-west, is a lowe isle
cauled S. Nicholas Isle, not a quarter of a myle far the mayn shore,
and conteyneth a vi. or viii. acres in cumpace, and fedeth shepe and
conies, nurishing also broode of se byrdes. Ther is a bridg sumwhat
above thes ii. vyllages of x. or xii. stone arches, over the which men
passe when the se ys yn.

Fro Fowey haven to Lowe creeke the grownd ny the see syde ys very
fertile of corne and gresse, and no tynne werkes.

From Loowe Creke to Tamar ys a xii. myles toward the towne of
Plymmuth. Yn the west syde of Tamar, withyn iii. myles of the haven
muth of Tamar, is a symple fisshar towne called _Mylbrooke_. Also apon
another creke west of the sayd ryver, and nerer up, is a towne cawled
_S. Germayns_, wherin is now a priori of Blake Chanons, and a paroche
chirche yn the body of the same. Beside the hye altare of the same
priory on the right hand ys a tumbe in the walle with an image of a
bishop; and over the tumbe a xi. bishops paynted with their names and
verses as token of so many bishoppes biried there, or that ther had
beene so many bishoppes of Cornwalle that had theyr seete theer. And
at this day the bishop of Exceter hathe a place cauled Cudden Beke,
joyning hard apon the sowth-est side of the same toun.

North-est of S. Germaynes, vi. myles apon the ryver of Tamar, is a
market town cawled _Asshe_. And neere to the same, westward withyn ii.
myles, ys a rownd castel of the kinges, cawled _Trematon_, as a man
showld say the secund forteres on Tamar. At the towne of Asshe is a
passage or fery of a quarter of a myle over.

Also ii. myles fro Asshe northward ynto the land is a smaul village
cawled _Caregrin_. Est of this is Bere Parke and hous in Devonshire,
dividid from Caregrin _tantum Tamara_.

From Low to Tamar by the sowth se the grownd is fertile of corn and
gresse, but withowt tynne warkes.

_Launston_, otherwys cawlled Lostephan, yn old tyme cawlled Dunevet,
stondith ii. myles beyownd Powlston Bridge on Tamar westward. The
sayde town Dunevet, otherwise Lawnston, is a walled towne ny yn cumpas
a myle, but now ruinus. On the north side of the towne a castel
stonding on a hye hille withyn the sayd towne, hath iii. rownde
wardes. Part of the castel stonding northwest, ys parcel of the walle
of the town. Ther be withyn this town iii. gates and a postern; also a
gate to go owt of the castel ynto the old parke. Sum gentelmen of
Cornewal hold ther landes by castel-gard, that ys to say for
reparation of this castel and towne; and withyn this castel ys a
chapel, and a hawle for syses and sessions, for a commune gayle for al
Cornwayle is yn this castel. Withyn this towne is a market, a mayre
and burgesses, with a chapel of Mary Magdalen to theyr uses.

In a vale at the foote of the hil of the sayde town, abowt an arow
shot fro the castel northward, is a priory of chanons regular dedicate
to St. Stephan.

North-est, almost half a myle of the sayde priory, is a lytle village
apon a hille, and a paroche chirche of _S. Stephen_ yn yt. The opinion
is that the chanons first dwelled on this hille, and cam thens downe
to a better and a warmer site. In the priory chirche yarde standeth
also a paroche chyrche.

The wall of Dunevet ys hy, larg, and strong, and defensably set.

By the north side of the priory runneth a litle ryver.

In Dunevet be ii. conduites of derived water.


     [44] Again noticed thus: “Ther lay buryed before the high
     altare in a high tumbe of a very darkesche gray marble, one
     Thomas Veviane, Prior of Bodmyn and Suffragane _Megarerutis
     Episcopus_. He dyed not long sins,” Vol. iii. fol. 1.

     [45] In the margin are the following notes on the Arundells:

     “Humfre Arundale, a man of mene landes, brother to old
     Arundale of Lanheron.

     “Humfre Arundale, a man of mene landes, nephew to Arundale.

     “Sir John Arundale, sun and heir to Arundale of Lanheron.

     “Syr Thomas Arundale, brother to Sir John.

     “―――― Arundal, brother to Syr John and Thomas, hath land of
     his father’s ――――e.

     “Arundale, of ―――― in Falmuth haven, cum out of the house of
     Lanheron. Cariehayes, where Trevagnion now dwellith, was
     once the Arundalles.”

     [46] In the margin are the following notes on the Vivians:

     “Vivian’s grandfather was a man of mene land.

     “Vivian’s father was a galant Courtier set forth by Somerset
     Lord Herbert.

     “Vivian now being heir, hath sum more land then his father
     had, and yet he hath scant an hunderith markes by yere.

     “This Vivian hath an uncle, a lawier, a man of mene landes.

     “The heir of the eldest house of the Vivians is now lord of
     Tredine Castelle at the southe-west pointe of Cornewal.

     “There was found, _in hominum memoria_, digging for the fox,
     a brase [pot] ful of Roman mony.”

     [47] Market-jew or Marazion.

     [48] In a side note “Cenor, and of sum caullid Kenor, ubi
     pauca vel nulla vestigia.”

     [49] That is, fed or supplied: as a fire was fed with
     _betars_.

     [50] Leland repeats this statement: “Thomas Treury _now
     living_ made a blocke house on S. Catarine’s Hill bottome.”
     Hearne’s edit. vol. iii. p. 34, note.




APPENDIX.

VIII.

DRAYTON’S POLY-OLBION.――CORNWALL.


MICHAEL DRAYTON was born of a gentleman’s family in Warwickshire in
the year 1563. His ancestors are said to have migrated from Drayton in
Lancashire.

Michael exhibited a strong genius for poetry at an early age. He
studied at Oxford, but without taking a degree. In 1588 he appears to
have served in a military capacity; as he describes the glorious
victory over the Invincible Armada, as seen by himself, from the shore
near Dover. He died in 1631, and was buried in Westminster Abbey.

Mr. Drayton was a very voluminous writer of Poetry. We have from him――

  Heroic Epistles after the model of Ovid.
  The Barons’ Wars in the Reign of Edward the Second.
  The Battle of Agincourt.
  The Shepherd’s Garland.
  Elegies.
  The Man in the Moon, the Owl, Odes, and various other small Poems.

But his greatest work is the Poly-Olbion, in twenty Cantos or Songs,
of which the first is here given, with the Author’s Notes or
Illustrations, as it contains a description of Cornwall, commencing
with a Dialogue between St. Michael’s Mount and the Bar of Hayle,
which must have passed immediately over Tredrea the Editor’s House.

The singular title of his great work is derived from the Greek Πόλυς
many and also very; and Ολβιὸς happy; some neuter substantive
understood, perhaps the Latin _Regnum_; and founded on one of the idle
fancies current in the middle ages, which derived Albion (a name of
this island) in some way or another from Ολβιὸς.

       *     *     *     *     *

Michael Drayton commences his national poem with the western point of
the Country, and his First Song is as follows:

        THE ARGUMENT.

    _The sprightly Muse her wing displays,
    And the French islands first surveys;
    Bears up with Neptune, and in glory
    Transcends proud Cornwal’s promontory;
    There crowns Mount-Michael, and descries
    How all those riverets fall and rise;
    Then takes in Tamer, as she bounds
    The Cornish and Devonian grounds.
    And whilst the Devonshire nymphs relate
    Their loves, their fortunes, and estate,
    Dert undertaketh to revive
    Our Brute, and sings his first arrive:
    Then northward to the verge she bends,
    And her first song at Ax she ends._

  Of Albion’s glorious isle the wonders whilst I write,
  The sundry varying soils, the pleasures infinite,
  (Where heat kills not the cold, nor cold expells the heat,
  The calms too mildly small, nor winds too roughly great,
  Nor night doth hinder day, nor day the night doth wrong,
  The summer not too short, the winter not too long,)
  What help shall I invoke to aid my muse the while?
    Thou Genius of the place (this most renowned isle)
  Which lived’st long before the all-earth-drowning flood,
  Whilst yet the world did swarm with her gigantic brood,
  Go thou before me still thy circling shores about,
  And in this wand’ring maze help to conduct me out:
  Direct my course so right, as with thy hand to show
  Which way thy forests range, which way thy rivers flow;
  Wise Genius, by thy help that so I may descry
  How thy fair mountains stand, and how thy vallies lie;
  From those clear pearly cliffs which see the morning’s pride,
  And check the surly imps of Neptune when they chide,
  Unto the big-swoln waves in the[51] Iberian stream,
  Where Titan still unyokes his fiery-hoofed team,
  And oft his flaming locks in luscious nectar steeps,
  When from Olympus’ top he plungeth in the deeps:
  That from[52] th’ Armoric sands, on surging Neptune’s leas,
  Through the Hibernic gulf (those rough Vergivian seas)
  My verse with wings of skill may fly a lofty gait,
  As Amphitrite clips this island fortunate,
  Till through the sleepy main to[53] Thuly I have gone,
  And seen the frozen isles, the cold[54] Deucalidon,
  Amongst whose iron rocks grim Saturn yet remains,
  Bound in those gloomy caves with adamantine chains.
    Ye sacred[55] bards, that to your harps’ melodious strings
  Sung th’ ancient Heroes’ deeds (the monuments of Kings)
  And in your dreadul verse ingrav’d the prophecies,
  The aged world’s descents and genealogies;
  If, as those[56] Druids taught, which kept the British rites,
  And dwelt in darksome groves, there counselling with sprites
  (But their opinions fail’d, by error led awry,
  As since clear truth hath shew’d to their posterity)
  When these our souls by death our bodies do forsake,
  They instantly again do other bodies take;
  I could have wisht your spirits redoubled in my breast,
  To give my verse applause to time’s eternal rest.
    Thus scarcely said the Muse, but hovering while she hung
  Upon the[57] Celtic wastes, the sea-nymphs loudly sung:
  ‘O ever-happy isles, your heads so high that bear,
  ‘By nature strongly fenc’d, which never need to fear
  ‘On Neptune’s watry realms when Eölus raiseth wars,
  ‘And every billow bounds, as though to quench the stars:
  ‘Fair Jersey first of these here scatter’d in the deep,
  ‘Peculiarly that boasts thy double-horned sheep:
  ‘Inferior nor to thee, thou Guernsey, bravely crown’d
  ‘With rough-embattled rocks, whose venom-hating ground
  ‘The hard’ned emeril hath, which thou abroad dost send:
  ‘Thou Ligon her belov’d, and Serk, that doth attend
  ‘Her pleasure every hour; as Jethow, them at need,
  ‘With pheasants, fallow deer, and conies that dost feed:
  ‘Ye seven small sister isles, and Sorlings, which to see
  ‘The half-sunk sea-man joys; or whatsoe’er you be,
  ‘From fruitful Aurney, near the ancient Celtic shore,
  ‘To Ushant and the Seams, whereas those nuns of yore
  ‘Gave answers from their caves, and took what shapes they please:
  ‘Ye happy islands set within the British seas,
  ‘With shrill and jocund shouts, th’unmeasur’d deeps awake,
  ‘And let the Gods of sea their secret bowr’s forsake,
  ‘Whilst our industrious muse Great Britain forth shall bring,
  ‘Crown’d with those glorious wreaths that beautify the spring;
  ‘And whilst green Thetis’ nymphs, with many an amorous lay
  ‘Sing our invention safe unto her long-wisht bay.’
  Upon the utmost end of Cornwal’s furrowing beak,
  Where[58] Bresan from the land the tilting waves doth break;
  The shore let her transcend, the[59] promont to descry,
  And view about the point th’ unnumbred fowl that fly;
  Some rising like a storm from off the troubled sand,
  Seem in their hov’ring flight to shadow all the land;
  Some sitting on the beach to prune their painted breasts,
  As if both earth and air they only did possess;
  Whence climbing to the cliffs, herself she firmly sets
  The bourns, the brooks, the becks, the rills, the rivulets,
  Exactly to derive; receiving in her way
  That streightned tongue of land, where at Mount-Michael’s bay,
  Rude Neptune cutting in, a cantle forth doth take;
  And on the other side, Hayle’s vaster mouth doth make
  A[60] chersonese thereof, the corner clipping in;
  Where to th’industrious Muse the Mount doth thus begin:
    ‘Before thou further pass, and leave this setting shore,
  ‘Whose towns unto the saints that lived here of yore
  ‘(Their fasting, works and pray’rs, remaining to our shames)
  ‘Were rear’d, and justly call’d by their peculiar names,
  ‘The builders honour still; this due and let them have,
  ‘As deign to drop a tear upon each holy grave;
  ‘Whose charity and zeal, instead of knowledge stood:
  ‘For surely in themselves they were right simply good.
  ‘If credulous too much, thereby th’ offended heaven,
  ‘In their devout intents yet be their sins forgiven.’
  Then from his rugged top the tears down trickling fell;
  And in his passion stirr’d, again began to tell
  Strange things, that in his days time’s course had brought to pass:
  That forty miles now sea, sometimes firm fore-land was;
  And that a forest then, which now with him is flood,
  Whereof he first was call’d the Hoar-rock in the wood;
  Relating then how long this soil had laid forlorn,
  As that her Genius now had almost her forsworn,
  And of their ancient love did utterly repent,
  Sith to destroy herself that fatal tool she lent,
  To which th’ insatiate slave her intrails out doth draw,
  That thrusts his gripple hand into her golden maw;
  And for his part doth wish, that it were in his pow’r
  To let the ocean in, her wholly to devour.
    Which Hayle doth overhear, and much doth blame his rage;
  And told him (to his teeth) he doated with his age.
  For Hayle (a lusty nymph, bent all to amorous play,
  And having quick recourse into the Severn sea,
  With Neptune’s pages oft disporting in the deep;
  One never touch’d with care, but how herself to keep
  In excellent estate) doth thus again intreat;
  ‘Muse, leave the wayward Mount to his distemper’d heat,
  ‘Who nothing can produce but what doth taste of spight,
  ‘I’ll shew thee things of ours most worthy thy delight.
  ‘Behold our diamonds here, as in the quarrs they stand,
  ‘By nature neatly cut, as by a skilful hand,
  ‘Who varieth them in forms, both curiously and oft;
  ‘Which for she (wanting power) produceth them too soft,
  ‘That virtue which she could not liberally impart,
  ‘She striveth to amend by her own proper art.
  ‘Besides the sea-holm here, that spreadeth all our shore,
  ‘The sick-consuming man so powerful to restore,
  ‘Whose root th’ eringo is, the reins that doth inflame,
  ‘So strongly to perform the Cytheræan game,
  ‘That generally approv’d both far and near is sought;
  ‘And our Main-Amber here, and Burien trophy, thought
  ‘Much wrong’d, nor yet prefer’d for wonders with the rest.’
    But the laborious muse, upon her journey prest,
  Thus uttereth to herself; ‘To guide my course aright,
  ‘What mound or steddy mere is offered to my sight,
  ‘Upon this out-strecht arm, whilst sailing here at ease,
  ‘Betwixt the southern waste, and the Sabrinian seas,
  ‘I view those wanton brooks, that waxing still do wane;
  ‘That scarcely can conceive, but brought to bed again;
  ‘Scarce rising from the spring, (that is their natural mother)
  ‘To grow into a stream, but buried in another.’
  When Chore doth call her on, that wholly doth betake
  Herself unto the Loo; transform’d into a lake,
  Through that impatient love she had to entertain
  The lustful Neptune oft; whom when his wracks restrain,
  Impatient of the wrong, impetuously he raves:
  And in his rageful flow, the furious King of waves
  Breaks foaming o’er the beach, whom nothing seems to cool,
  Till he have wrought his will on that capacious pool:
  Where Menedge, by his brooks, a[61] chersonese is cast,
  Widening the slender shore to ease it in the waste;
  A promont jutting out into the dropping south,
  That with his threatning cliffs in horrid Neptune’s mouth,
  Derides him and his pow’r: nor cares how him he greets.
  Next Roseland (as his friend, the mightier Menedge) meets
  Great Neptune when he swells, and rageth at the rocks
  (Set out into those seas) inforcing through his shocks
  Those arms of sea that thrust into the tinny strand,
  By their meandred creeks indenting of that land,
  Whose fame by every tongue is for her minerals hurl’d,
  Near from the mid-day’s point, thro’ out the western world.
  Here Vale a lively flood, her nobler name that gives
  To[62] Falmouth; and by whom it famous ever lives,
  Whose entrance is from sea so intricately wound,
  Her haven angled so about her harb’rous sound,
  That in her quiet bay a hundred ships may ride,
  Yet not the tallest mast be of the tall’st descry’d;
  Her bravery to this nymph when neighbouring rivers told,
  Her mind to them again she briefly doth unfold:
    ‘Let[63] Camel of her course and curious windings boast,
  ‘In that her greatness reigns sole mistress of that coast
  ‘Twixt Tamer and that bay, where Hayle pours forth her pride,
  ‘And let us (nobler nymphs) upon the mid-day side
  ‘Be frolic with the best. Thou Foy, before us all,
  ‘By thine own named town made famous in thy fall,
  ‘As Low amongst us here; a most delicious brook,
  ‘With all our sister nymphs, that to the noonsted look,
  ‘Which gliding from the hills, upon the tinny ore,
  ‘Betwixt your high-rear’d banks, resort to this our shore;
  ‘Lov’d streams, let us exult, and think ourselves no less
  ‘Than those upon their side, the setting that possess.’
    Which Camel over-heard: but what doth she respect
  Their taunts, her proper course that loosly doth neglect?
  As frantic, ever since her British Arthur’s blood,
  By Mordred’s murtherous hand was mingled with her flood.
  For as that river best might boast that conqueror’s breath,
  So sadly she bemoans his too untimely death;
  Who after twelve proud fields against the Saxon fought,
  Yet back unto her banks by fate was lastly brought:
  As though no other place on Britain’s spacious earth
  Were worthy of his end, but where he had his birth:
  And careless ever since how she her course doth steer,
  This mutt’reth to herself, in wand’ring here and there:
  ‘Even in the aged’st face, where beauty once did dwell,
  ‘And nature (in the least) but seemed to excell,
  ‘Time cannot make such waste, but something will appear,
  ‘To shew some little tract of delicacy there,
  ‘Or some religious work, in building many a day,
  ‘That this penurious age hath suffer’d to decay;
  ‘Some limb or model dragg’d out of the ruinous mass,
  ‘The richness will declare in glory whilst it was:
  ‘But time upon my waste committed hath such theft,
  ‘That it of Arthur here scarce memory hath left.’
    The Nine-ston’d trophy thus whilst she doth entertain,
  Proud Tamer swoops along with such a lusty train,
  As fits so brave a flood, two countries that divides:
  So to increase her strength, she from her equal sides,
  Receives their several rills; and of the Cornish kind,
  First taketh Atre in; and her not much behind
  Comes Kensey: after whom, clear Enjan in doth make,
  In Tamer’s roomthier banks, their rest that scarcely take.
  Then Lyner, tho’ the while aloof she seem’d to keep,
  Her sovereign when she sees t’ approach the surgeful deep,
  To beautify her fall, her plenteous tribute brings;
  This honours Tamer much, that she whose plenteous springs
  Those proud aspiring hills, Bromwelly and his friend
  High Rowtor, from their tops impartially commend,
  And is by[64] Carew’s muse the river most renown’d,
  Associate should her grace to the Devonian ground,
  Which in those other brooks doth emulation breed.
  Of which, first Car comes crown’d with ozier, segs and reed:
  Then Lid creeps on along, and taking Thrushel, throws
  Herself amongst the rocks; and so incavern’d goes,
  That of the blessed light (from other floods) debarr’d,
  To bellow underneath she only can be heard,
  As those that view her tract, seems strangely to affright:
  So Toovy straineth in; and Plym, that claims by right.
  The christning of that bay, which bears her nobler name.
  Upon the British coast[65] what ship yet ever came
  That not of Plymouth hears, where those brave navies lie,
  From cannons thund’ring throats that all the world defy?
  Which to invasive spoil, when th’ English list to draw,
  Have check’d Iberia’s pride, and held her oft in awe.
  Oft furnishing our dames with India’s rar’st devices,
  And lent us gold, and pearl, rich silks, and dainty spices.
  But Tamer takes the place, and all attend her here,
  A faithful bound to both; and two that be so near
  For likeliness of soil, and quantity they hold,
  Before the Roman came; whose people were of old
  Known by one general name, upon this point that dwell,
  All other of this isle in wrestling that excell:
  With collars be they yok’d to prove the arm at length,
  Like bulls set head to head, with meer deliver strength;
  Or by the girdles graspt, they practise with the hip,
  The[66] forward, backward, falx, the mar, the turn, the trip,
  When stript into their shirts, each other they invade
  Within a spacious ring, by the beholders made,
  According to the law. Or when the ball to throw,
  And drive it to the goal, in squadrons forth they go;
  And to avoid the troops their forces that fore-lay,
  Through dikes and rivers make, in this robustious play;
  By which the toils of war most lively are exprest.
    But, Muse, may I demand, Why these of all the rest,
  (As mighty Albion’s eld’st) most active are and strong?
  From[67] Corin came it first, or from the use so long?
  Or that this fore-land lies farth’st out into his sight,
  Which spreads his vigorous flames on every lesser light?
  With th’ virtue of his beams, this place that doth inspire,
  Whose pregnant womb prepar’d by his all-powerful fire,
  Being purely hot and moist, projects that fruitful seed,
  Which strongly doth beget, and doth as strongly breed:
  The well-disposed heaven here proving to the earth
  A husband furthering fruit, a midwife helping birth.
    But whilst th’ industrious Muse thus labours to relate
  Those rillets that attend proud Tamer and her state,
  A neighbourer of this nymph’s, as high in fortune’s grace,
  And whence calm Tamer trips, clear Towridge in that place
  Is poured from the spring, and seems at first to flow
  That way which Tamer strains; but as she great doth grow,
  Rememb’reth to foresee what rivals she should find
  To interrupt her course; whose so unsettled mind
  Ock coming in perceives, and thus doth her perswade:
  ‘Now Neptune shield, bright nymph, thy beauty should be made
  ‘The object of her scorn, which (for thou can’st not be
  ‘Upon the southern side so absolute as she)
  ‘Will awe thee in thy course. Wherefore, fair flood, recoil,
  ‘And where thou may’st alone be sov’reign of the soil,
  ‘There exercise thy pow’r, thy braveries and display:
  ‘Turn, Towridge, let us back to the Sabrinian sea,
  ‘Where Thetis’ handmaids still, in that recourseful deep,
  ‘With those rough Gods of sea continual revels keep;
  ‘There may’st thou live admir’d, the mistress of the lake.’
    Wise Ock she doth obey, returning, and doth take
  The Taw; which from her fount forc’d on with amorous gales,
  And eas’ly ambling down through the Devonian dales,
  Brings with her Moul and Bray, her banks that gently bathe;
  Which on her dainty breast, in many a silver swathe,
  She bears unto that bay where Barstaple beholds
  How her beloved Taw clear Towridge there enfolds.
    The confluence of these brooks divulg’d in Dertmoor, bred
  Distrust in her sad breast, that she so largely spread,
  And in this spacious shire the near’st the center set
  Of any place of note, that these should bravely get
  The praise from those that sprung out of her pearly lap:
  Which, nourish’d and bred up at her most plenteous pap,
  No sooner taught to dade, but from their mother trip,
  And in their speedy course strive others to outstrip.
  The Yalm, the Awn, the Aum, by spacious Dertmoor fed,
  And in the southern sea b’ing likewise brought to bed;
  That these were not of power to publish her desert,
  Much griev’d the ancient Moor; which understood by Dert
  (From all the other floods that only takes her name,
  And as her eld’st, in right the heir of all her fame)
  To shew her nobler spirit it greatly doth behove.
    ‘Dear mother, from your breast this fear (quoth she) remove;
  ‘Defy their utmost force; there’s not the proudest flood,
  ‘That falls betwixt the Mount and Exmore, shall make good
  ‘Her royalty with mine, with me nor can compare:
  ‘I challenge any one to answer me that dare;
  ‘That was, before them all, predestinate to meet
  ‘My Britain-founding Brute, when with his puissant fleet
  ‘At Totness first he touch’d; which shall renown my stream,
  ‘(Which now the envious world doth slander for a dream:)
  ‘Whose fatal flight from Greece, his fortunate arrive
  ‘In happy Albion here whilst strongly I revive,
  ‘Dear Harburn, at thy hands this credit let me win,
  ‘Quoth she, that as thou hast my faithful handmaid been,
  ‘So now, my only brook, assist me with thy spring,
  ‘Whilst of the godlike Brute the story thus I sing.
    ‘When long-renowned Troy lay spent in hostile fire,
  ‘And aged Priam’s pomp did with her flames expire,
  ‘Æneas (taking thence Ascanius, his young son,
  ‘And his most rev’rend sire, the grave Anchises, won
  ‘From shoals of slaughtering Greeks) set out from Simois’ shores,
  ‘And through the Tyrrhene sea, by strength of toiling oars,
  ‘Raught Italy at last; where King Latinus lent
  ‘Safe harbour for his ships, with wrackful tempests rent:
  ‘When in the Latin court, Lavinia young and fair,
  ‘Her father’s only child, and kingdom’s only heir,
  ‘Upon the Trojan Lord her liking strongly plac’d,
  ‘And languish’d in the fires that her fair breast embrac’d:
  ‘But Turnus (at that time) the proud Rutulian King,
  ‘A suitor to the maid, Æneas malicing,
  ‘By force of arms attempts his rival to extrude:
  ‘But by the Teucrian power courageously subdu’d,
  ‘Bright Cytheræa’s son the Latin crown obtain’d;
  ‘And dying, in his stead his son Ascanius reign’d.
  ‘Next Sylvius him succeeds, begetting Brute again:
  ‘Who in his mother’s womb whilst yet he did remain,
  ‘The oracles gave out, that next-born Brute should be
  ‘His parents’ only death: which soon they liv’d to see.
  ‘For, in his painful birth his mother did depart;
  ‘And ere his fifteenth year, in hunting of a hart,
  ‘He with a luckless shaft his hapless father slew:
  ‘For which, out of his throne their King the Latines threw.
    ‘Who wand’ring in the world, to Greece at last doth get,
  ‘Where whilst he liv’d unknown, and oft with want beset,
  ‘He of the race of Troy a remnant hapt to find,
  ‘There by the Grecians held; which (having still in mind
  ‘Their tedious ten years’ war, and famous heroes slain)
  ‘In slavery with them still those Trojans did detain;
  ‘Which Pyrrhus thither brought, and did with hate pursue,
  ‘To wreak Achilles’ death, at Troy whom Paris slew,
  ‘There by Pandrasus kept in sad and servile awe:
  ‘Who when they knew young Brute, and that brave shape they saw,
  ‘They humbly him desire, that he a mean would be,
  ‘From those imperious Greeks his countrymen to free.
    ‘He, finding out a rare and sprightly youth, to fit
  ‘His humour every way, for courage, power, and wit,
  ‘Assaracus, (who though that by his sire he were
  ‘A Prince among the Greeks, yet held the Trojans dear;
  ‘Descended of their stock upon the mother’s side,
  ‘For which he by the Greeks his birth-right was deny’d)
  ‘Impatient of his wrongs, with him brave Brute arose,
  ‘And of the Trojan youth courageous captains chose,
  ‘Rais’d earth-quakes with their drums, the ruffling ensigns rear,
  ‘And gath’ring young and old that rightly Trojan were,
  ‘Up to the mountains march, thro’ straits and forests strong:
  ‘Where taking-in the towns pretended to belong
  ‘Unto that[68] Grecian Lord, some forces there they put:
  ‘Within whose safer walls their wives and children shut,
  ‘Into the fields they drew, for liberty to stand.
    ‘Which when Pandrasus heard, he sent his strict command
  ‘To levy all the power he presently could make:
  ‘So to their strengths of war the Trojans them betake.
    ‘But whilst the Grecian guides (not knowing how or where
  ‘The Teucrians were intrench’d, or what their forces were)
  ‘In foul disorder’d troops yet straggled, as secure,
  ‘This loosenees to their spoil the Trojans did allure,
  ‘Who fiercely them assail’d: where staunchless fury rap’d
  ‘(The Grecians in so fast, that scarcely one escap’d;
  ‘Yea, proud Pandrasus’ flight himself could hardly free.
  ‘Who, when he saw his force thus frustrated to be,
  ‘And by his present loss his passed error found,
  ‘As by a later war to cure a former wound,
  ‘Doth reinforce his power, to make a second fight;
  ‘When they, whose better wits had over-matcht his might,
  ‘Loth what they got to lose, as politicly cast
  ‘His armies to intrap, in getting to them fast
  ‘Antigonus as friend, and Anaclet his peer
  ‘(Surpriz’d in the last fight) by gifts who hired were
  ‘Into the Grecian camp th’ insuing night to go,
  ‘And feign they were stol’n forth, to their allies to show
  ‘How they might have the spoil of all the Trojan pride;
  ‘And gaining them belief, the credulous Grecians guide
  ‘Into th’ ambushment near, that secretly was laid:
  ‘So to the Trojans hands the Grecians were betray’d;
  ‘Pandrasus self surpriz’d; his crown who to redeem
  ‘(Which scarcely worth their wrong the Trojan race esteem)
  ‘Their slavery long sustain’d did willingly release:
  ‘And (for a lasting league of amity and peace)
  ‘Bright Innogen, his child, for wife to Brutus gave,
  ‘(And furnisht them a fleet, with all things they could crave
  ‘To set them out to sea. Who launching at the last
  ‘They on Lergecia light, an isle; and, ere they past,
  ‘Unto a temple built to great Diana there,
  ‘The noble Brutus went; wise[69] Trivia to enquire,
  ‘To shew them where the stock of ancient Troy to place.
    ‘The Goddess, that both knew and lov’d the Trojan race,
  ‘Reveal’d to him in dreams, that farthest to the West,
  ‘He should descry the isle of Albion highly blest;
  ‘With giants lately stor’d; their numbers now decay’d:
  ‘By vanquishing the rest, his hopes should there be staid:
  ‘Where from the stock of Troy, those puissant Kings should rise,
  ‘Whose conquests from the West, the world should scant suffice.
    ‘Thus answer’d; great with hope, to sea they put again,
  ‘And safely under sail, the hours do entertain
  ‘With sights of sundry shores, which they from far descry:
  ‘And viewing with delight th’ Azarian mountains high,
  ‘One walking on the deck, unto his friend would say
  ‘(As I have heard some tell) so goodly Ida lay.
    ‘Thus talking ’mongst themselves, they sun-burnt Afric keep
  ‘Upon the leeward still and (sulking up the deep)
  ‘For Mauritania make: where putting-in, they find
  ‘A remnant (yet reserv’d) of th’ ancient Dardan kind,
  ‘By brave Antenor brought from out the Greekish spoils
  ‘(O long renowned Troy! of thee and of thy toils,
  ‘What country had not heard?) which to their General then
  ‘Great Corineus had, the strong’st of mortal men:
  ‘To whom (with joyful hearts) Diana’s will they show.
  ‘Who eas’ly being won along with them to go,
  ‘They all together put into the watry plain:
  ‘Oft times with pirates, oft with monsters of the main
  ‘Distressed in their way; whom hope forbids to fear.
  ‘Those Pillars first they pass which Jove’s great son did rear,
  ‘And cuffing those stern waves which like huge mountains roll
  ‘(Full joy in every part possessing every soul)
  ‘In Aquitain at last the Ilion race arrive;
  ‘Whom strongly to repulse when as those recreants strive,
  ‘They (anchoring there at first but to refresh their fleet,
  ‘Yet saw those savage men so rudely them to greet)
  ‘Unshipt their warlike youth, advancing to the shore.
  ‘The dwellers, which perceiv’d such danger at the door,
  ‘Their King Groffarius get to raise his powerful force:
  ‘Who must’ring up an host of mingled foot and horse,
  ‘Upon the Trojans set; when suddenly began
  ‘A fierce and dangerous fight; where Corineus ran
  ‘With slaughter thro’ the thick-set squadrons of the foes,
  ‘And with his armed ax laid on such deadly blows,
  ‘That heaps of lifeless trunks each passage stopt up quite.
    ‘Groffarius, having lost the honour of the fight,
  ‘Repairs his ruin’d powers; not so to give them breath:
  ‘When they, which must be freed by conquest or by death,
  ‘And conquering them before, hop’d now to do no less
  ‘(The like in courage still) stand for the like success.
  ‘Then stern and deadly war put on his horrid shape;
  ‘And wounds appear’d so wide, as if the grave did gape
  ‘To swallow both at once; which strove as both shall fall,
  ‘When they with slaughter seem’d to be encircled all:
  ‘Where Turon (of the rest) Brute’s sister’s valiant son
  ‘(By whose approved deeds that day was chiefly won)
  ‘Six hundred slew outright through his peculiar strength:
  ‘By multitudes of men yet over-prest at length,
  ‘His nobler uncle there, to his immortal name,
  ‘The city Turon built, and well endowed the same.
    ‘For Albion sailing then, th’ arrived quickly here
  ‘(O! never in this world men half so joyful were,
  ‘With shouts heard up to heaven, when they beheld the land!)
  ‘And in this very place where Totness now doth stand,
  ‘First set their Gods of Troy, kissing the blessed shore;
  ‘Then foraging this isle, long promis’d them before,
  ‘Amongst the ragged cliffs those monstrous giants fought,
  ‘Who (of their dreadful kind) t’ appall the Trojans brought,
  ‘Great Gogmagog, an oak that by the roots could tear:
  ‘So mighty were (that time) the men who lived there:
  ‘But, for the use of arms he did not understand
  ‘(Except from rock or tree, that coming next to hand
  ‘He raz’d out of the earth to execute his rage,)
  ‘He challenge makes for strength, and offereth there his gage.
  ‘Which Corin taketh up, to answer by and by,
  ‘Upon this son of earth his utmost power to try.
    ‘All doubtful to which part the victory would go,
  ‘Upon that lofty place at Plimmouth call’d the Hoe,
  ‘Those mighty wrestlers met;[70] with many an ireful look
  ‘Who threatned, as the one hold of the other took:
  ‘But, grappled, glowing fire shines in their sparkling eyes,
  ‘And, whilst at length of arm one from the other lies,
  ‘Their lusty sinews swell like cables, as they strive:
  ‘Their feet such trampling make, as tho’ they forc’d to drive
  ‘A thunder out of earth, which stagger’d with the weight:
  ‘Thus, either’s utmost force urg’d to the greatest height,
  ‘Whilst one upon his hip the other seeks to lift,
  ‘And th’ adverse (by a turn) doth from his cunning shift,
  ‘Their short-fetcht troubled breath a hollow noise doth make
  ‘Like bellows of a forge. Then Corin up doth take
  ‘The giant ’twixt the grains; and voiding of his hold
  ‘(Before his cumbrous feet he well recover could)
  ‘Pitcht headlong from the hill; as when a man doth throw
  ‘An axtree, that with slight deliver’d from the toe
  ‘Roots up the yielding earth; so that his violent fall
  ‘Strook Neptune with such strength, as shoulder’d him withal;
  ‘That where the monstrous waves like mountains late did stand,
  ‘They leapt out of the place, and left the bared sand
  ‘To gaze upon wide heaven: so great a blow it gave.
  ‘For which, the conquering Brute on Corineus brave
  ‘This horn of land bestow’d, and markt it with his name
  ‘Of Corin, Cornwal call’d to his immortal fame.’
    Clear Dert delivering thus the famous Brute’s arrive,
  Inflam’d with her report, the straggling rivulets strive
  So highly her to raise, that Ting (whose banks were blest
  By her beloved nymph dear Leman) which addrest
  And fully with herself determined before
  To sing the Danish spoils committed on her shore,
  When hither from the east they came in mighty swarms,
  Nor could their native earth contain their numerous arms,
  Their surcrease grew so great, as forced them at last
  To seek another soil, as bees do when they cast;
  And by their impious pride how hard she was bested,
  When all the country swam with blood of Saxons shed:
  This river, as I said, which had determin’d long
  The Deluge of the Danes exactly to have song,
  It utterly neglects; and studying how to do
  The Dert those high respects belonging her unto,
  Inviteth goodly Ex, who from her full-fed spring
  Her little Barlee hath, and Dunsbrook her to bring
  From Exmore; when she hath scarcely found her course,
  Than Creddy cometh in, and Forto, which inforce
  Her faster to her fall; as Ken her closely clips,
  And on her eastern side sweet Leman gently slips
  Into her widen’d banks, her Sovereign to assist;
  As Columb wins for Ex clear Wever and the Clist,
  Contributing their streams their mistress’ fame to raise.
  As all assist the Ex, so Ex consumeth these;
  Like some unthrifty youth, depending on the court,
  To win an idle name, that keeps a needless port;
  And raising his old rent, exacts his farmers’ store
  The landlord to enrich, the tenants wond’rous poor:
  Who having lent him theirs, he then consumes his own,
  That with most vain expense upon the Prince is thrown:
  So these, the lesser brooks, unto the greater pay;
  The greater, they again spend all upon the sea:
  As, Otrey (that her name doth of the otters take,
  Abounding in her banks,) and Ax, their utmost make
  To aid stout Dert, that dar’d Brute’s story to revive.
  For when the Saxon first the Britons forth did drive,
  Some up into the hills themselves o’er Severn shut:
  Upon this point of land for refuge others put,
  To that brave race of Brute still fortunate. For where
  Great Brute first disembark’d his wand’ring Trojans, there
  His offspring (after long expulst the inner land,
  When they the Saxon power no longer could withstand)
  Found refuge in their flight; where Ax and Otrey first
  Gave these poor souls to drink, opprest with grievous thirst.
    Here I’ll unyoke awhile, and turn my steeds to meat:
  The land grows large and wide: my team begins to sweat.


NOTES.


_From which he first was call’d the Hoar-rock in the wood._

That the ocean (as in many other places of other countries) hath eaten
up much of what was here once shore, is a common report, approved in
the Cornish name of St. Michael’s mount; which is Careg Cowz in Clowz,
i. e. the Hoar-rock in the wood.[71]


_And our Main-amber here, and Burien trophy_――――

Main-amber, i. e. Ambrose’s stone (not far from Pensans) so great,
that many men’s united strength cannot remove it, yet with one finger
you may wag it. The Burien trophy is 19 stones, circularly disposed,
and, in the middle, one much exceeding the rest in greatness: by
conjecture of most learned Camden, erected either under the Romans, or
else by King Athelstan in his conquest of these parts.


_Were worthy of his end, but where he had his birth._

Near Camel about Camblan, was[72] Arthur slain by Mordred, and on the
same shore, east from the river’s mouth, born in Tintagel castle.
Gorlois Prince of Cornwal, at Uther-Pendragon’s coronation, solemnized
in London, upon divers too kind passages and lascivious regards twixt
the King and his wife Igerne, grew very jealous, in a rage left the
court, committed his wife’s chastity to this castle’s safeguard; and
to prevent the wasting of his country, (which upon this discontent was
threatned) betook himself in other forts to martial preparation. Uther
(his blood boiling in lust) upon advice of Ulfin Rhicaradoch, one of
his Knights, by Ambrose Merlin’s magic personated like Gorlois, and
Ulfin like one Jordan, servant to Gorlois, made such successful use of
their imposture, that (the Prince in the mean time slain) Arthur was
the same night begotten, and verified that[73] Νόθοι τε πολλοὶ γνησίων
ἀμείνονες. altho’ Merlin by the rule of Hermes, or astrological
direction, justified that he was conceived three hours after Gorlois’
death; by this shift answering the dangerous imputation of bastardy to
the heir of a crown. For Uther taking Igern to wife, left Arthur his
successor in the Kingdom. Here have you a Jupiter, an Alcmena, an
Amphitryo, a Sosias, and a Mercury; nor wants there scarce any thing,
but that truth-passing reports of Poetical bards have made the birth
an Hercules.


_Known by one general name upon this point that dwell._

The name of Dumnonii, Damnonii, or Danmonii, in Solinus and Ptolemy,
comprehended the people of Devonshire and Cornwal; whence the Lizard
promontory is called Damnium in[74] Marcian Heracleotes; and William
of Malmesbury, Florence of Worcester, Roger of Hoveden and others,
stile Devonshire by name of Domnonia, perhaps all from Duff neint, i.
e. low valleys in British; wherein are most habitations of the
countrey, as judicious Camden teaches me.

  _Or that this foreland lies furth’st out into his sight,
  Which spreads his vigorous flames_――――

Fuller report of the excellence in wrestling and nimbleness of body,
wherewith this western people have been and are famous, you may find
in Carew’s description of his country. But to give reason of the
climate’s nature for this prerogative in them, I think as difficult as
to shew why about the Magellanic streights they are so white, about
the Cape de Buon Speranza so black,[75] yet both under the same
tropic; why the Abyssins are but tawny moors, when as in the
East-Indian isles, Zeilan and Malabar, they are very black, both in
the same parallel; or why we that live in this Northern latitude,
compared with the Southern, should not be like affected from like
cause. I refer it no more to the Sun, than the special horsemanship in
our Northern men, the nimble ability of the Irish, the fiery motions
of the French, Italian jealousy, German liberty, Spanish puft-up
vanity, or those different and perpetual carriages of state-government,
Haste and Delay, which, as[76] inbred qualities, were remarkable in
the two most martial people of Greece. The cause of Æthiopian
blackness and curled hair was long since judiciously[77] fetcht from
the disposition of soil, air, water, and singular operations of the
heavens; with confutation of those which attribute it to the Sun’s
distance. And I am resolved that every land hath its so singular
self-nature, and individual habitude with celestial influence, that
human knowledge, consisting most of all in universality, is not yet
furnish’d with what is requisite to so particular discovery. But for
the learning of this point in a special treatise Hippocrates, Ptolemy,
Bodin, and others have copious disputes.


_Of Corin Cornwal call’d, to his immortal fame._

So, if you believe the tale of Corin and Gogmagog: but rather imagine
the name of Cornwall from this promontory of the Land’s End, extending
itself like a[78] horn, which in most tongues is Corn, or very near.
Thus was a[79] promontory in Cyprus called Cerastes, and in the now
Candy or Crete, and Gazaria (the old Taurica Chersonesus) another
titled[80] Κρίου μέτωπον: and Brundusium in Italy had name from
Brendon or[81] Brention, i. e. _a Hart’s-head_, in the Messapian
tongue, for similitude of horns. But[82] Malmesbury thus: “They are
called Cornwalshmen, because being seated in the western part of
Britain, they lie overagainst a horn (a promontory) of Gaul.” The
whole name is as if you should say Corn-wales; for hither in the Saxon
conquest the British called Welsh (signifying the people rather than
strangers, as the vulgar opinion wills) made transmigration: whereof
an old[83] rhimer:

  The vewe that wer of hom bileved, as in Cornwaile and Wailes,
  Brutons ner namore ycluped, ac Waleys ywis.

Such was the language of your fathers between three and four hundred
years since.


     [51] The western or Spanish ocean.

     [52] Bretagny coasts.

     [53] The farthest isle in the British ocean.

     [54] The sea upon the north of Scotland.

     [55] The old British poets.

     [56] Priests among the ancient Britons.

     [57] The French seas.

     [58] A small island upon the very point of Cornwall.

     [59] A hill lying out as an elbow of land into the sea.

     [60] A place almost surrounded by the sea.

     [61] A place almost surrounded by the sea.

     [62] The bravery of Falmouth haven.

     [63] This is also called Alan.

     [64] A worthy gentleman who wrote the Description of
     Cornwall.

     [65] The praise of Plymouth.

     [66] Terms of art in wrestling.

     [67] Our first great wrestler, arriving here with Brute.

     [68] Assaracus.

     [69] One of the titles of Diana.

     [70] Description of the wrestling betwixt Corineus and
     Gogmagog.

     [71] Carew de Scrip. Corn. lib. 2.

     [72] Dictus hinc in Merlini vaticinio, Aper Cornubiæ.

     [73] _Euripid. Andromach._ Bastards are often times better
     than legitimates.

     [74] Τὸ δάμνιον ἅκρον.

     [75] Ortelius theatro.

     [76] Thucydid. α et passim de Athen. et Lacedæm. et de
     Thæbis, et Chalcide. Vide Columell. i. de re rustic, cap. 4.

     [77] Onesicrit. ap. Strabon. lib. ιε.

     [78] Cornugallia dicta est H. Huntingdonio, aliis.

     [79] Strabo lib. ζ. and ι. Stephan. Melan. Plin. Georg.
     passim.

     [80] Ram’s-head.

     [81] Seleucus apud Stephan. Βρεντησ. and Suidas in Βρενδ.

     [82] De gest. reg. 2. c. 6.

     [83] Robertus Glocestrens.




APPENDIX.

IX.

CORNISH NAMES.

(Communicated by T. Hingston, Esq. M.D.)


It is commonly understood, that those places in Cornwall, which have
the word _San_ or _Saint_ as the antecedent component of their names,
are so denominated after some martyr or confessor of early times. This
is a very obvious and indisputable fact. But it is by no means
certain, that in every instance of the kind, the saint conferred his
name on the place: for in many cases, the converse seems to have been
practised; and contrary to what is generally imagined, I believe that
the place bestowed its name on the saint. Thus, for example, in _St.
Stephen_, and _St. Allan_, two saints are equally commemorated; but
Stephen, by his own name, which he possessed independently of
accidental circumstances; and Allan, by a name, superseding that which
he had received at his baptism, and subsequently derived from the
place of his retirement.

The want of this distinction has occasioned unspeakable labour and
perplexity in the investigation of Cornish antiquities. Books and
documents have been examined, and enquiries made in vain, after names,
of which no record exists; and which, even in their own day, were
scarcely known beyond the narrow district, in which they were
venerated. In some instances, indeed, the objects of such researches
might have been illustrious before their retirement; but if, in that
case, their acts and sufferings were chronicled, the history was in
effect abolished, when their identity was lost in the assumption of a
new name.

Thus many of our early saints took refuge here, from the persecutions,
to which the Christian faith was exposed in Ireland; and their history
has been chiefly sought in the hagiographies of that country. But the
greater number of them, on coming into Cornwall, complied with this
custom, common, indeed, with all men at that time, of changing the
name with the residence; and accordingly, instead of that, by which
they had been formerly known, and might have been recorded, they
adopted or received another, as choice or accident determined their
settlement. Hence we have _St. Hy_, or _St. Iä_, the Island-saint;
_St. Uny_, (or perhaps more correctly _St. Unan_) the Down-saint; _St.
Dennis_, the Hill-saint; _St. Allan_, the Moor-saint.

But not only have these, and similar appellations, been erroneously
regarded as the baptismal and proper names of the saints, whom they
commemorate; but the accidental corruption of some of them has led to
still greater mistakes; and from the mere coincidence of sound, the
saint whose memory was to be preserved, has been identified with some
other person, for whom that honour could not have been intended. Thus
the town of St. I’s, or with the genitive at full length, as it was
commonly written, St. Ies, has for many generations been called St.
Ives, though the correct form was frequently used till the close of
the seventeenth century. In consequence of this corruption, the place
has been said to have derived its name from some bishop Ivo, either
the Persian, who gave his name to St. Ives, in Huntingdonshire, or the
celebrated Ivo, bishop of Chartres. But St. I was a female from
Ireland.

The case of St. Dennis seems to be of the same kind; though in that
instance the error is not owing to a corruption of the name, but to
the similarity of the sound. St. Dennis signifies the _Saint on the
Hill_, or more strictly, the _Hill-saint_; and the church stands at
this day on the summit of a hill. But the good man, who lived there,
has been considered the same person as St. Dionysius, or St. Dennis,
the areopagite.

I cannot help suspecting, that some error of this sort has occurred in
the case of Paul-parish near Penzance, which is reported to have taken
its name from St. Paul de Leon. Now that portion of the Mount’s bay,
by which this parish is bounded on the east, is called _The Lake_; and
this lake, which might have been correctly so denominated in ancient
times, is at the foot of the hill, on which the present church stands;
and it is, therefore, probable that some man of eminent piety once
resided near it. In that case, he was called the _Lake-saint_, which
rendered into Cornish, becomes _St. Pol_. For this reason, I believe
that the common account is wholly untrue; and that, as in many other
instances, the name of the saint, and through him, of the parish,
originated entirely in a local accident.

I may state here, that some parishes have a popular name, arising not
unfrequently from very trifling circumstances; and this name has, in
some cases, entirely superseded the more legitimate denomination,
under which the church was consecrated and registered. Thus, to give
one example, the parish at the Lizard is called _Landuwednac_, which
signifies the _Black-and-white-church_. This appellation was suggested
by the peculiar appearance of the church and tower, which are built of
black and white stones, arranged alternately, in the manner of a
chessboard.

Amongst the names of our Cornish towns, there are three remarkable
above the rest for having been very diligently examined, and very
little understood. Upon these it may be proper to make a few
observations.

Of _Truro_ Tonkin says, that ‘it is so called from its three principal
streets; for _Tri_, three, and _Ru_, a street, have been turned to
_Truro_ merely _euphoniæ gratia_.’ Tonkin ought to have suspected,
that _Tri_, occurring as the first syllable in the name of a town, was
not likely to mean _three_, because _Tri_ or _Tre_ signifies a
dwelling place, or an assemblage of dwellings, and therefore, a
_town_. He might have supposed too, that the place was called _Truro_,
before its three principal streets were built, or designed; since it
does not appear to have ever had any other name, and we cannot
believe, that it was so denominated by anticipation. For in those rude
times, towns were not commonly laid out upon a definite plan: but the
houses were erected according to the taste or convenience of the
builders; and the streets seem to have been formed, almost as accident
might determine.

But Whitaker says, that Tonkin’s etymology, which was adopted from
Camden, is altogether absurd; and he consequently undertakes to find a
better. For this purpose he assumes, that Truro takes its name from
its castle. Now he imagines, that the castle was denominated
_Trevereu_, and that the name was subsequently familiarized to
_Treuro_. In that way, he thinks, the etymon at once presents itself;
and we are accordingly informed, that _Truro_ signifies the castle on
the _Uro_. This, however, is to take a course the reverse of that
pursued by etymologists in general: for they seek the meaning of a
word in its primitive form, but Mr. Whitaker in its corruption. There
is also another objection, which may be considered equally conclusive;
for, as Mr. Polwhele says, we have no such river in Cornwall as the
_Uro_.

Mr. Polwhele himself has proposed a third explanation, which, however
ingenious, I think equally unsatisfactory. He suggests, that Truro may
be a town of Roman origin; and that the name is a corruption of
_Trevorou_, the _town-on-the-ways_. But if it were so, we should not
be wholly without any evidence of the fact. Proof would be found in
some obscure tradition, some historical record, or some local
circumstance; and the name itself, upon which alone this opinion is
grounded, would be more completely consistent with it. When the Romans
founded a town, it was not their custom to give it a name exhibiting
no trace of their own language; but _Trúro_ is unquestionably Cornish;
and besides that, as persons skilled in such matters would easily see,
it is no very natural corruption of _Trevórou_. Polwh. Hist. of
Cornwall, vol. I, p. 189; vol. II, p. 215.

Yet that it is a corruption, is certain. In the charter granted by
Reginald Fitzroy, in the reign of Henry II. the name of the town is
written _Trivereu_. It is of this word, therefore, that _Truro_ is a
corruption; and if we can determine its signification, we shall
ascertain the etymon of _Truro_. Now nothing can be better known, than
that _Rivereu_, or _Riverô_, in the ancient language of this county,
had the same meaning as the kindred word _rivers_, in English: and
with regard to the initial _T_, it can be scarcely necessary to say,
that it stands for _Tre_, or its archaic form _Te_, a _town_. The
word, therefore, in the primitive and proper mode of writing it, is
_Trerivero_; and consequently, the name as it appears in Reginald’s
charter, is itself an example of that liability to change, by which
the same word was subsequently converted to _Truro_. But the
alteration in that case was so slight, that the composition of the
word was scarcely obscured; and so natural, that its corruption could
not have been prevented. For it was hardly possible in common speech
to avoid the elision, which turns _Trerívero_ into _Trívero_; as this
again has been contracted to _Trúro_. The word _Truro_, then,
signifies the _Town-on-the-rivers_, or as we should now say,
_Riverton_. And this interpretation is illustrated and confirmed by
the local peculiarities: for the town is intersected by two rivers,
which originally were its boundaries――the Cenion on the south, and the
Allan on the east.

With respect to _Marazion_ or _Marketjew_, I need not examine what has
been said about Sion, Jerusalem, and the Jews; for it is wholly
unfounded and absurd. _Marghas_, or in its softer form _Maras_,
signifies a _market_, and _Iän_, of or belonging to an _island_. Hence
_Marasían_ means the _Island-market_. This name is derived from St.
Michael’s Mount, which is in fact an island; and to its monastery the
market belonged. _Marghasjew_, as it is called in Elizabeth’s charter,
or as we now speak, _Marketjew_, signifies _Thursday-market_: the
charter, by which the privilege of a market was granted to the monks
by Robert, earl of Cornwall, having appointed it to be kept on the
_fifth_ day of the week. In Domesday the town is called _Tremarastol_,
which signifies the _Market-town-of-the-monastery_. These three names,
therefore, mutually explain one another; and their signification is
confirmed by the historical facts.

_Penzance_ is said to signify “the _Saint’s head_, or rather the _Head
of the bay_.” Polwh. Hist. of Cornwall, vol. ii. p. 39. I believe that
Mr. Polwhele quotes this from Tonkin. But did Tonkin himself expect
that his readers would be satisfied with an etymology so indeterminate
and contradictory? Yet this is the usual mode of explaining Cornish
words. Camden says, that _Penzance_, or as he more correctly spells
it, _Pensans_, means the _Head of the sands_. But Whitaker declares
this to be unworthy of Camden; and he therefore gives us an improved
interpretation of his own. For this purpose he reads Tonkin backwards;
and as that writer renders _Pensans_ the _Head of the bay_, Whitaker
asserts it to be the _Bay of the Head_! And this is unworthy of
Whitaker. He says, the phrase is equivalent to _Mount’s bay_. But it
was never imagined before, that the Cornish word _Pen_ could signify
such an object as St. Michael’s Mount; and still less can it be
supposed that a town would be denominated a _Bay_. Yet the real
signification of _Pensans_ lay at his feet; for nothing can be more
obvious and easy. The name is derived both from the little chapel of
St. Anthony, which he himself describes, and from the point of land,
on which that chapel stood. For there the town took its beginning; and
there, of course, it found a name――that of the place which it
occupied. Now a _point of land_ was in Cornish called _Pen_; and when
it chanced to be distinguished by the erection of a chapel, it would
naturally be denominated _sacred_ or _holy_, which was expressed by
the word _san_, or if it was a terminal syllable, _sans_. Hence
_Pensans_ signifies _Holy-head_; and in allusion to this, John the
Baptist’s head is in the town-arms.

But Mr. Whitaker would not have committed this error, if he had been
heedful of a principle, observed in the composition of Cornish words,
which can never be safely overlooked, in any attempt to investigate
their meaning. The ancient names of places in Cornwall mostly consist
of two substantive nouns, one of which has the force of an adjective,
and qualifies the other: as _Penrose_, _Penpraze_, _Polwhele_. The
component parts of such words have always been treated as if they had
been associated by caprice, or accident; and the same elements have
been represented as adjectives or substantives indifferently,
according to the fancy or convenience of the interpreter.

But in truth, the ingredients of all these compounds are combined and
distinguished by a settled rule. It is generally supposed, that in all
instances the word used substantively precedes that which is employed
adjectively. In many cases, however, it does not: and as, therefore,
the qualifying noun cannot with certainty be discovered by its
position, they who suppose it to occupy uniformly the second place,
can be right only by chance; and we are consequently to look for some
other mark, by which it may be easily and invariably known. That mark
is the _accent_. Thus we say _Pensáns_: and so, if we admit, what Mr.
Whitaker supposes, that _Pen_ may signify a _hill_, and _sans_ a
_bay_, the word in that case would mean the _Bay-hill_, and not as he
says, the _Hill-bay_.

But as this accent lives only in common speech, and the peculiarities
of the English manner have already considerably disturbed it, those
who have occasion to write any Cornish words, and especially the
cultivators of our history and antiquities, should always mark the
accented syllable: for there is no other way of making this rule of
interpretation available; and of preventing perplexities for the time
to come, still greater than those, which have already existed. But
besides the natural and inevitable tendency of the predominant English
to change the pronunciation of Cornish words, there is a kind of whim
or fashion amongst some, who know nothing of these things, by which
the corruption is wilfully hastened; and while they confidently say
_Pénrose_, _Pénprase_, and _Nánkivel_, they presume to correct those,
who with more knowledge or less affectation, are accustomed to speak
otherwise.




APPENDIX.

X.

TANNER’S NOTITIA MONASTICA FOR CORNWALL, FROM NASMITH’S EDITION,
FOLIO, 1787, WITH ADDITIONS.

(For these additions I am indebted to Sir Henry Ellis, F.R.S. Sec.
S.A. one of the Editors of the New Edition of Dugdale’s Monasticon.
EDIT.)


I. ST. ANTONY, _or_ Antonine.

In this county were two priories of this name, which are often
confounded by some of our writers.

1. BENEDICTINE CELL. One was a cell of Black monks of Angiers,
belonging to Trewardreth priory[84], and being mentioned in Gervase of
Canterbury’s catalogue must be as early as K. Richard I.st’s time. The
rectory here, as parcel of the possessions of Tywardreith, was
granted, _6 Eliz._ to William and John Killigrew.

2. AUSTIN CELL. The other, St. Anthony’s near St. Mawes, was a small
priory of two Austin canons subordinate to Plimpton[85], and as parcel
of the same was granted, _38 Hen. 8._ to Thomas Goodwin.


II. ST. BENNETT’S, _in the parish of_ Lanivet.

NUNNERY. The tower whereof is yet standing.[86]


III. ST. BLAISE _near_ Fowey, _in the deanry of_ Poudre.

ALMSHOUSE. An old almshouse.[87]


IV. BODMIN, _olim_ Bosmanna.[88]

1. AUSTIN CANONS. The body of St. Petroc being removed[89] to this
place, there was a church built to his memory, and the episcopal see
for Cornwall was therein placed by K. Edward the elder and archbishop
Plegmund, A.D. 905.[90] Here K. Æthelstan is reported to have met with
old Saxon, or rather British, monks following the rule of St.
Benedict, to whom he granted so great privileges and endowments, that
he is accounted founder of the monastery here, about A.D. 926. That
settlement was destroyed by the Danish pirates, A.D. 981, yet the
Religious continued here under several shapes,[91] and much
alienations of their lands, both before and after the Conquest, till
about the year 1120, when one Algar, with the king’s licence and the
consent of Will. Warlewast bishop of Exeter, re-established this
religious house, and placed therein Regular canons of the order of St.
Austin, who continued till the general suppression, when it was styled
the priory of St. Mary and St. Petroc,[92] and was valued at 270_l._
0_s._ 11_d._ _per ann._ Dugd. 289_l._ 11_s._ 11_d._ Speed. The site,
with the demesnes, were granted, _36 Hen. 8._ to Tho. Sternhold, one
of the first translators of the Psalms into English metre.

  _Vide_ Mon. Angl. tom. i. 213. ex Leland. Collect. vol. i. p. 75,
    76. Et ibid. p. 227. cartam Ethelredi regis de episcopo Cornubiæ
    apud S. Petrocum, et libertatibus eidem concessis. Ibid. tom. ii.
    p. 5. cart. 57 Hen. 3. m. 9. confirm. cartam Eadredi regis priori
    et canonicis de Bodmine, de manerio de Niwetone.
  Leland. Itin. vol. ii. p. 114. vol. iii. p. 12.
  In Itinerario Will. de Worcestre, p. 100. 111. de fundatione et
    dimensione ecclesiæ; p. 107. excerpta ex kalendario principalis
    Libri Antiphoner: p. 111. nomina nobilium et generosorum in
    kalendario memoratorum: p. 112. ex registro.
  Cart. Antiq. D. n. 40, 41.
  Cart. 36 Hen. 3. m. 18. pro manerio de Neweton.
  Cart. 13 Ed. 1. n. 9. et 66. pro piscaria in Alan, bosco in Bodan,
  et aliis libertatibus.
  Cart. 6 Ed. 2. n. 1.
  Cart. 9 Ed. 3. n. 41. pro emptione stanni: Pat. 19. Ed. 3. p. 2. m.
  d. de visu franci plegii infra villam: Pat. 48 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 12.
  de XL _s._ redd. exeunt. de burgo, et boscis de Kingswood et
  Kelleritho.
  Pat. 3 Ric. 2. p. 2. m. 25.
  Pat. 1 Hen. 4. p. 8. m. 34.
  Pat. 1 Hen. 6. p. 3. m. 24. Pat. 3 Hen. 6. p. 1. m. 11.
  Pat. 3 Ed. 4. p. 1. m.

2. HOSPITAL. About a mile from Bodmin is St. Laurence,[93] a poor
hospital or lazarhouse,[94] on the east; well endowed for nineteen
leprous people, two whole men and women, and a priest to minister unto
them.[95]

  _Vide_ Leland. Itin. vol. ii. p. 115. vol. iii. p. 12.

3. ALMSHOUSE. At the west end of the town was a chapel and an
almshouse,[96] but not endowed with lands.[97]

  _Vide_ Leland. Itin. vol. ii. p. 115.

4. GREY FRIERS. A house of Grey friers on the south side of the
market-place, begun by John of London a merchant, and augmented by
Edmund earl of Cornwall.[98] After the dissolution this friery was
granted to one William Abbot, _37 Hen. 8._ and in Q. Elizabeth’s time
it was made the house of correction for the county.[99]

  _Vide_ Leland. Itin. vol. ii. p. 115. vol. iii. p. 12.
  Stevens’[100] Supplement, vol. i. p. 154.
  In Itinerario Will. de Worcestre, p. 99. de fundatione et excerpta
    quædam ex kalendario.
  [Harl. MS. 6964. p. 77.
  Hoveden, Script. post Bedam, fol. 324.
  Domesd. tom. i. fol. 120. b. 121.
  MS. Cole, Brit. Mus. vol. xxvii. 184 b.             H.E.]


V. ST. BURIEN, _in the deanry of_ Trigge Minor.

COLLEGE. King Ethelstan is said to have built and endowed a collegiate
church almost at the Land’s End,[101] and to have granted the benefit
of a sanctuary and other privileges to the same, in honor of St.
Buriena or Beriana a holy woman from Ireland, who had an oratory and
was buried here. At the Conquest here were Secular canons,[102] as
there were a dean and three prebendaries at the time of making the
Lincoln taxation _20 Ed. 1._ and also down to _26 Hen. 8._ though this
deanery was seized into the king’s hands _temp. Ed. 3._ by reason that
Mr. John de Maunte then incumbent, was a Frenchman; and as alien, was
given, _24 Hen. 6._ to King’s college in Cambridge, and afterward by
K. Edward 4. (_anno regni 7_.) to Windsor college;[103] yet neither of
those societies long enjoyed, or had any benefit from it; for it was
all along, and still continues, an independent deanry, in the gift of
the crown or of the duke of Cornwall, of exempt jurisdiction as a
royal free chapel.[104] The deanry or rectory, _26 Hen. 8._ was valued
at 48_l._ 12_s._ 1_d._ _per ann._ Prebenda parva 2_l._ 8_s._ 4_d._
Prebenda de Respernel 7_l._ 6_s._ 8_d._ Prebenda de Tirthney 7_l._

  _Vide_ Coke’s Institutes, vol. i. p. 344.
  Roll’s Abridgement, p. 2. f. 341.
  Prynne’s Papal Usurpations, vol. iii. p. 933.
  Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 18. vol. vii. p. 117.
  In bibl. Harleiana, ms. 980. p. 212. of the exemption of the dean
    from episcopal jurisdiction and proceedings thereon, 26 Ed. 3. ms.
    7048. p. 343. collectiones e chronico eccl. S. Burianæ.
  De exemptione hujus ecclesiæ a jurisdictione episc. Exon. plac.
    term. S. Hill; 8 Ed. 2. ms. penes V. cl. Andr. Fountaine equ. aur.
    p. 167, &c.
  Fragmentum registri hujus collegii tempore Roberti Knollys decani,
    viz. ab anno 1473. ad annum 1485. ms. haud ita pridem in bibl. RR.
    P. DD. Joannis Moore episc. Eliensis, nunc in bibl. publica acad.
    Cantab. Ee. v. 34.
  Cart. 15 Joan. m. 2. n. 42.
  Cart. 30 Ed. 1. n. 26. pro mercato die Sabbati, et feria in vigilia,
    die, et crast. S. Martini in hieme apud S. Burien.
  Pat. 9 Ed. 2. p. 1. m. 10 vel 20. Plac. coram rege, 12 Ed. 2. Mich.
    rot. 128. Ibid. 17 Ed. 2. Trin. rot. 90.
  Pat. 1 Ed. 3. p. 3. m. 13. de prebenda de Trethin, &c. Claus. 11 Ed.
    3. p. 2. m. 13. Plac. coram rege, 13 Ed. 3. … rot.. Escaet.
    Corn. 20 Ed. 3. n. 32. Pat. 20 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 15. Pat. 31 Ed. 3.
    p. 3. m. 9.
  Pat. 24 Hen. 6. p. 3. m. 28. pro appropriatione hujus decanatus
    collegio S. Nicholai in Acad. Cantab.
  Pat. 1 Ed. 4. p. 3. m. 24.
    [MS. Lansd. Brit. Mus. 966. Ex Chronico quodam Ecclesiæ Sanctæ
    Burianæ in Cornub. MS. penes Matth. Hutton, S.T.P. fol. 11. b.
  Harl. MS. 6958. pp. 219, 220, 224, 241, 253.
            6959. pp. 260, 286.
            6960. pp. 25, 68.
            6961. pp. 48, 86, 198, 205.
            6962. pp. 20, 98, 128.
            6963. pp. 72, 122.
  MS. Cole, vol. xxvii. fol. 184 b.
  Domesd. tom. i. fol. 121.
  Mr. Moyle’s Works, i. p. 247.                       H. E.]


VI. CONSTANTYN, _in the deanry of_ Kerryer.

This seems to have been a church of more than ordinary note, by what
is said in Domesday Book under the title _Ecclesiæ aliquorum
Sanctorum_; scil. “S. Constantinus tenet dim. hidam terræ, quæ fuit
quieta ab omni servitio T. R. E. sed postquam comes terram accepit,
reddebat geldum injuste, sicut terra villanorum.” This church was
afterwards appropriate to the dean and chapter of Exeter, who are
still the patrons of it.

  [Domesd. tom. i. fol. 121.     H. E.]


VII. ENDELLION, _in the deanry of_ Trigge Minor.

COLLEGE. In the parish church here, dedicated to St. Endelienta, were
three prebends or portions before _20 Ed. 1._[105] and subsist to this
day, and have incumbents under the titles of Bodmin or the King’s
prebend, Marney’s prebend, and Trehaverock prebend, taxed each at
5_l._ _per ann._ _26 Hen. 8._


VIII. ST. GERMANS.

AUSTIN CANONS. Here was a collegiate church of ancient foundation in
honor of St. German, one of the famous French bishops, who came over
into Britain to oppose the Pelagian heresy. K. Ethelstan is said to
have made one Conon bishop here, A.D. 936, though it seems more
probable that the episcopal see for Cornwall was not fixed here till
after the burning of the bishop’s house and cathedral church at
Bodmin; after which K. Canute more amply endowed this church of St.
German; and, about A. D. 1050. Leofric, who was bishop here and of
Crediton, having united both bishopricks in the church of St. Peter at
Exeter, changed the Seculars[106] here into Regular canons.[107] The
yearly revenues of this priory were valued, _26 Hen. 8._ at 243_l._
8_s._ Dugd. Speed 227_l._ 4_s._ 8_d._ Clare, ms. Valor. The site was
granted, _33 Hen. 8._ to Kath.[108] Champernoun, John Ridgway, &c.

  _Vide_ Mon. Angl. tom. i. p. 213. ex Leland. Collect. i. 75. Ibid.
    tom. ii. p. 5, 6. inquis. 32 Ed. 3. ex rot. pat. 7 Ric. 2. p. 1.
    m. 24. de fundatione et dotatione.
  Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 40. vol. vii. p. 122.
  Cartas, &c. penes Edw. Elliot de eadem.
  Fin. 6 Hen. 3. m. 5. de mercat. ibid.
  Cart. 6 Ed. 2. n. 1.
  Pat. 17 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 32. de mercato et feria in villa S. Germani,
    et de lib. war. in Lamash: Pat. 31 Ed. 3. p. 3. m. 8. pro ten. in
    Lanrake: Plac. coram reg. 37 Ed. 3. rot. 9. Pat. 38 Ed. 3. p. 2.
    m. 46. Pat. 43 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 23 vel 43.
  Pat. 2 Rich. 2. p. 1. m. 47. pro ten. in Pollersek, Trewint,
    Todisford, Lancottock, &c. Pat. 9 Ric. 2. p. 1. m.. rex restituit
    prioratum S. Germani (qui fuit de fundatione Leofrici episc. et
    quem rex recuperaverat in curia sua adversus Jo. Grandison episc.
    Exon.) episc. Exon. et successoribus: Pat. 16 Ric. 2. p. 1. m. 27.
    de redd. in Trethinek, Morna, &c.
  Pat. 11 Hen. 6. p. 1. m. 17. pro ten. in Frogwell, Tenepath, &c.
  [Stowe’s Annals, edit. 1592. p. 120. Domesd. tom. i. fol. 120 b.
                                                                  H. E.]


IX. HELSTON, _in the deanry of_ Kerrier.

HOSPITAL. A priory or hospital at the west-south-west end of the town,
of the foundation of one Kellegrew,[109] dedicated to St. John
Baptist.[110] It was endowed only with 12_l._ 16_s._ 4_d._ _per ann._
Dugd. 14_l._ 7_s._ 4_d._ Speed.

  _Vide_ Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 23. Registrum Edm. Stafford episc.
    Exon. f. 135.


X. ST. KARENTOC, _or_ Crantoc, _near_ Padstow, _in the deanry of_
Pider.

COLLEGE. Here were Secular canons[111] _temp. Edw. Conf._ who
continued till the general dissolution, when its yearly revenues were
valued at 89_l._ 15_s._ 8_d._ which were divided amongst the dean,
nine prebendaries,[112] and four vicars choral.[113] This collegiate
church was dedicated to St. Carantocus, said to be a disciple of St.
Patric, and was in the patronage of the bishop of Exeter,[114] but now
in John Buller of Mowall, esq.

  _Vide_ in Prynne’s Papal Usurpations, vol. ii. p. 736. Claus. 34
    Hen. 3. m. 15.
  Pat. 29 Hen. 3. m. 7.
  Pat. 43 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 31. Pat. 44
  Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 23.

  [Domesd. tom. i. fol. 121.                          H. E.]


XI. LAMMANA.

BENEDICTINE CELL. The abbey of Glastonbury had sometime a cell here,
dedicated to St. Michael.

  _Vide_ Adami de Domerham historia de rebus gestis Glastoniensibus,
    p. 423. ut prioratus de Basselake et de Lamena ad ordinacionem
    conventus pertineant. Et in Auctuario eidem historiæ annexo, p.
    599. cartam Hastuti filii Johannis de Solenneio de insula de
    Lamana: p. 600. Roberti de Cardinay de uno ferlingo terræ de
    Trewodlowan: p. 601. Rogeri filii Willelmi de terra de Lamman: p.
    602. compositionem inter conventum Glaston et conventum de
    Lanstaventone de decimis in dominico Odonis de Portlo; p. 603.
    cartam Ricardi comiti Cornubiæ de Lammana.


XII. LANACHEBRAN, _or_ Lan-a-Kebran, _alias_ St. Kevran,[115] _in the
deanry of_ Kerrier.

CISTERTIAN CELL. Here was a society of Secular canons, at or about the
time of the Conquest, dedicated to St. Achebran:[116] and afterwards
here was a cell of Cistertian monks, subordinate to Beaulieu abbey in
Hampshire,[117] and the manor here, as parcel of the possessions of
Beaulieu, was granted, _2 Eliz._ to Francis earl of Bedford.

  _Vide_ in registro W. Bronscomb episc. Exon. ordinationem vicariæ S.
    Keverani, quam abbas de Bello Loco habet in proprios usus.
  Pat. 2 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 27. Plac. coram rege, 16 Ed. 3. Pasch. rot.
    230. Pat. 18 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 4. Pat. 19 Ed. 3. m …. Pat. 49 Ed. 3.
    p. 2. m. 10. pro privilegiis allocandis.

  [Domesd. tom. i. fol. 121.                          H. E.]


XIII. LAUNCELS, _in the deanry of_ Trigge Minor.

CELL to the abbey of Hertland.[118]


XIV. LAUNCESTON, _olim_ Lanstaveton, _i. e._ Fanum S. Stephani.

1. AUSTIN CANONS. There was a college of Secular[119] canons before
the Conquest, in the church of St. Stephen,[120] about half a mile
from this town, which being given to the bishop and church of Exeter
by king Henry I.[121] it was suppressed before A.D. 1126. by Will.
Warlewast bishop of Exeter, who in lieu of it founded in the west
suburb under the castle hill,[122] a priory for canons[123] of the
order of St. Austin, which was also dedicated to St. Stephen, to which
he gave the best part of the college lands.[124] The yearly revenues
of this monastery were rated, _26 Hen. 8._ at 354_l._ 0_s._ 11_d._,
_q._ Dugd. 392_l._ 11_s._ 2_d._ _q._ Speed.[125]

  _Vide_ in Mon. Angl. tom. ii. p. 107. quæ Leland. in Itin. vol. ii.
    p. 110. habet de Launceston: et cart. 13 Hen. 3. p. 1. m. 10.
    recit. per Inspex. cart. R. Joan. anno regni primo.
  Lelandi Collect. vol. i. p. 76. ejusdem Itin. vol. ii. p. 109. vol.
    iii. p. 132, 133. vol. vii. p. 123.
  In Itin. Will. de Worcestre, p. 134. dimensiones ecclesiæ, de
    fundatione, excerpta ex kalendario.
  In Auctuario ad Adamum de Domerham, p. 602. compositionem inter
    abbatem et conventum Glaston, et priorem et conventum de
    Lanstaventone de decimis in dominico dom. Odonis de Portlo.
  Registrum hujus prioratus, penes magistrum Ric. Escot de hosp.
    Lincoln.
  Registrum prioratus de Launceston, ms. in bibl. Bodl. Oxon. Tanner.
    196.
  Pat. 13 Hen. 3. m. 7. pro maner. de Cloveston.
  Pat. 3 Ed. 1. m. 24. de terris in Tottesden:
  Pat. 11 Ed. 1. m. 1. vel 2.
  Pat. 1 Ed. 3. p. 3. m. 14. vel. 15. Pat. 16 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 1.
  Pat. 1 Ric. 2. p. 2. m. 3. pro ten. in Newport; Ibid. p. 3. m. 19.
    Pat. 6 Ric. 2. p. 3. m.. Pat. 12 Ric. 2. p. 2. m. 24. pro mess.
    voc. _Shiphouse_ in Treburdesk: Pat. 16 Ric. 2. p. 2. m. 31. de
    mess. et terris in Newland, Landren, Leskard, &c. Pat. 19 Ric. 2.
    p. 2. m. 35. pro vicariis S. Tallini, de Tallam S. Mellorii, &c.
  Parl. 4 Hen. 4. petitionem contra priorem de vicariis de Lyskeret,
    Larkinham, et Tallum.
  Inquis. Corn. 1 Hen. 5. n. 51. de Bernhay: Pat. 2 Hen. 5. p. 3. m.
    32 vel 33.
  Rec. in scacc. 10 Hen. 6. Trin. rot. 5.
  Pat. 19 Ed. 4. m. 5 vel 6.

2. ST. LEONARD’S HOSPITAL. An hospital for lepers in this town,
dedicated to St. Leonard, is mentioned[126] pat. 6 Ric. 2. p. 3.

3. FRIERY. Mr. Carew[127] mentions a friery to have been here, besides
the abbey or priory.

  [MS. Lansdown. Brit. Mus. 939. fol. 21 b. Ex Registro Priorat. de
    Launceston MS. apogr. inter Libros olim Will. Griffith.
  Domesd. tom. i. fol. 120, 120 b.
  Harl. MS. 6958. pp. 180, 182.
  In Thorpe’s Cat. of MSS. 1833. No. 281. is a “Survey of the lands
    belonging to the Priory at Launceston, at the Dissolution of the
    Monasteries, 1539, 31 Hen. VIII. a contemporary Record, a long
    roll, upon paper, in fine condition, £16 16.”     H. E.]


XV. LESKARD, _or_ Minhenned, _near_ Leskard.

HOSPITAL. Here was anciently a house for lepers,[128] for there is an
indulgence granted by Edm. Stafford bishop of Exeter, to all those
who should contribute to the hospital of St. Mary Magdalen at Leskard,
about A.D. 1400.[129]


XVI. ST. MARTIN’S.

NUNNERY.[130]


XVII. MARY WEEK, _in the deanry of_ Trigge Minor.

COLLEGE. A college[131] and school here, as Carew.


XVIII. ST. MAWES.[132]

In the cart. roll of the fifteenth year of K. John, m. 2. n. 42. there
is a grant of a hundred shillings _per ann._ out of the church of St.
Berian in Cornwall to the monks of St. Matthew. I have not yet found
any monastery elsewhere in England dedicated to that Apostle.


XIX. ST. MICHAEL’S MOUNT.

ALIEN PRIORY. A priory of Benedictine monks placed here by K. Edward
the Confessor,[133] but before A.D. 1085. annexed to the abbey of St.
Michael in periculo Maris in Normandy, by Robert[134] earl of Moreton
and Cornwall. After the suppression of the alien priories, this was
given first by K. Henry 6. to King’s college Cambridge, and afterward
by K. Edward 4. to Sion abbey in Middlesex. At the first seizure of it
by K. Edward 3. the farm of it was rated but at 10_l._ _per ann._ but
at the time of K. Henry 8. the lands belonging to this house, as
parcel of Sion, were valued at 110_l._ 12_s._ 0_d._ _ob. per ann._

  _Vide_ in Mon. Angl. tom. i. p. 551. cartam S. Edwardi R. et cartas
    Roberti comitis et Liurici episc. Exon. Ibid. in tom. ii. p. 901,
    902, 903. cartam Edmundi comitis Cornwal recitantem et confimantem
    donationes Ricardi patris: Cart. Alani comitis Britanniæ de x _s._
    annui redditus de feria de Merdreshem: Cartam Ricardi regis
    Romanorum de feriis in Marhasgon: Cartam Conani ducis Britanniæ de
    Wath: Et bullam P. Adriani, A.D. 1155. confirmantem omnes
    possessiones tam in Normannia quam in Anglia cum anathemate.
  Du Monstrier, Neustriam piam, p..
  Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 17.
  In Itin. Will. de Worcestre, p. 101. indulgentiam concessam
    visitantibus hanc ecclesiam: p. 103. dimensiones ecclesiæ: p. 129.
    excerpta ex kalendario.
  In Madox’s Formulare Anglicanum, p. 59. Rogeri de Daledich
    confirmationem donationis VI_s._ VIII_d._ percipiend. annuatim de
    fœdo de Wiscomb per Henricum de Wiscomb factæ.
  In Dr. Archer’s account of the religious houses in the diocese of
    Bath printed at the end of Hearne’s Hemingford, p. 637. of a pension
    of x_l._ marks out of the rectory of Mertock.
  In Rymeri Fœder, &c. vol. viii. p. 102. 340, 341. pat. 5 Hen. 4. p.
    1. m. 21. pro restitutione hujus prioratus, qui dicitur “esse
    tempore guerræ fortalitium toti patriæ circumjacenti.”
  Registrum hujus prioratus olim penes Will. com. Sarisb. Excerpta ex
    isto registro penes V. cl. Joannem Anstis arm.
  Computos, &c. in officio Curiæ Augment. sub titulo _Syon
    Monasterium_.
  Rot. fin. 13 Ed. 2. m. 3. de terris in Lambedon: Pat. 14 Ed. 2. p.
    1. m. 12. de terris in Ottriton monachorum.
  Pat. 22 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 30. de ten. in Trevemeny, Polker, et
    Breglis: Pat. 30 Ed. 3. p. 3. m. penult.
  Pat. 10 Hen. 6. p. 1. m. ult. Pat. 20 Hen. 6. p. 4. m. 3. de
    concessione hujus prioratus rectori et scholaribus S. Nicholai
    Cantab.
  Pat. 1 Ed. 4. p. 2. m. 8. Ibid. p. 3. m. 1. Claus. 2 Ed. 4. n. 13.
    quiet. clam. præpositi S. Nich. Cantab. abbatissæ S. Salvatoris de
    Syon de hoc prioratu.
  [Domesd. tom. i. fol. 120 b.
  Harl. MS. 6965. p. 86.
  MS. Cole, vol. xxvii. fol. 184 b.
  Tanner mentions a Register of this House, “penes Will. Com. Sarisb.”
    This Register is still at Hatfield in Lord Salisbury’s possession.
    It came as a Title Deed there, Sir Robert Cecil having purchased
    the manor of Mt. St. Michael.                     H. E.]


XX. MINSTER, _or_ Talcarn[135], _in the deanry of_ Trigge Minor.

ALIEN PRIORY. An alien priory to the abbey of St. Sergius and Bachus
at Angiers.

  _Vide_ Mon. Angl. i. p. 1036. ex pat. 48 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 3. “Prior
    de Minstre habet apud Pilesfunte de redditu xx. sol.” Taxat.
    Lincoln; In Bundell. benef. alienig. 48 Ed. 3. “Minster prior
    alienigena habet in proprios usus ecclesias de Minster et
    Bodecastell:” In the account of knight’s fees in Mr. Carew’s
    Survey of Cornwall, f. 41. b. “Prior de Ministre tenet. i. par.
    feod. mort, in Polifant, 3 Hen. 4.”
  Year Books, 32 Hen. 6. 13, 14.


XXI. NEWPORT _near_ Launceston.

HOSPITAL. Here is an old hospital for lazars, dedicated to St. Thomas,
which was well endowed and governed in Mr. Carew’s time.[136]


XXII. NYOTT, _olim_ Neotstoke,[137] _or_ Neotstow, _or_ St. Guerir,
_in the deanry of_ West.

MONASTERY DESTROYED. Here was a monastery[138] or college[139] founded
in honor of St. Neotus, brother[140] to K. Alfred, who was here
buried, which continued till after the Conquest. The church here
belonged to Montacute priory in Somersetshire.

  _Vide_ in Joanne Glastoniensi, p. 111. historiolam fundationis hujus
    monasterii.
  Stevens’ Supplement, vol. i. p. 217.
  [Domesd. tom. i. fol. 121.                          H. E.]


XXIII. PETROCSTOW, _or_ Padstow, _olim_ Loderic, _or_ Laffenac, _or_
Adelston,[141] _in the deanry of_ Pydre.

MONASTERY DESTROYED. St. Petroc, a religious man born in Wales, but
coming from Ireland, is said to have built a monastery on the north
coast of Cornwall, about A.D. 520 and to have been there buried;[142]
his body was afterward removed to Bodmin.

  [Harl. MS. 6964. p. 77.――H. E.]


XXIV. PENRYN, _alias_ Glaseney, _in the parish of_ Gluvias _and deanry
of_ Kerrier.

COLLEGE. Walter Bronescomb the good bishop[143] of Exeter,[144] about
the year 1270,[145] built a collegiate church on a moor called
Glasenith, at the bottom of his park at Penryn, to the honor of the
blessed Virgin Mary and St. Thomas of Canterbury. It consisted of a
provost, a sacrist, eleven prebendaries,[146] seven vicars,[147] and
six choristers; and was certified, _26 Hen. 8._ to be worth 210_l._
13_s._ 2_d._ _per ann. in toto_. 205_l._ 10_s._ 6_d._ _clare_.

  _Vide_ in Mon. Angl. tom. iii. p. ii. p. 56. pat. 18 Ed. 2. p. 2. m.
    17. appropriationem ecclesiæ S. Alune in Cornubia.
  Lelandi Collect. vol. i. p. 115. ejusdem Itin. vol. iii. p. 27. vol.
    vii. p. 120.
  In Itin. Will. de Worcestre, p. 122. 128. de fundatione collegii de
    Penryn.
  In bibl. Harleiana, ms. 862. f. 118. instrumenta spectantia ad
    ecclesiam collegiatam de Glasney.
  Registrum hujus collegii, penes ―――― Parsons un. audit. scaccarii, A.D.
    1706. postea penes Jacobum Mickleton de hosp. Grayensi arm.
    Videtur esse idem cum registro penes Joannem Row nuper de medio
    Templo London, arm. unde quamplurima excerpsit V. cl. Joannes
    Anstis arm.
  Pat. 8 Ed. 2. p. 2. m. 2. 17. 20 et 27. Pat. 10 Ed. 2. p. 1. m: 19.
    de vicariis ecclesiæ.
  Fin. 2 Ed. 3. m. 6. in cedula: Pat. 2 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 36. pro ten.
    et eccl. in Lamerock: Pat. 26 Ed. 3. p. 3. m. 21. pro eccl. S.
    Justi in Penwith approprianda: Pat. 43 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 40. d. Pat.
    44 Ed. 3. p. 1. m; 10. et p. 2. m. 3. Pat. 45 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 40.
    d.
  Pat. 8 Hen. 4. p. 2. m. 9. pro ten. in Trewtham pro cantaria apud
    _Bodryganes alter_ in hoc collegio.
  [Harl. MS. 6958. p. 294.
             6960. pp. 166. 184. 234.
             6961. p. 225.
  Ducarel’s Extr. from the Lamb. Registers in Brit. Mus. vol. ix. p.
    218.                                              H. E.]


XXV. ST. PIERAN in Zabulo, _in the deanry of_ Pydre.

COLLEGE. In the days of K. Edward the Confessor here were a dean and
canons,[148] endowed with lands, and the privilege of a sanctuary.[149]
The church[150] was given by K. Henry 1. to the bishop and church of
Exeter, who still enjoy the great tithes and the advowson of the
vicarage.

  [Domesd. tom. i. fol. 121. H. E.]

  [Hearne mentions PORT ELIOT in the margin of his copy of Tanner’s
  first edition, and says it was sometimes a Priory, and at the
  Dissolution K. Henry VIII. bestowed it upon one of the ancestors of
  Richard Elliot mentioned in Norden’s Descr. of Cornwall.     H. E.]


XXVI. ST. PROBUS, _in the deanry_ of Powder.

COLLEGE. Here was a collegiate church of Secular canons before the
Conquest,[151] which was given to the bishop and church of Exeter by
K. Henry 1.[152] Here was once a dean:[153] Four prebendaries or
portionists occur here upon the Lincoln taxation, and some time
after;[154] but, _26 Hen. 8._ the glebe and tithe of St. Probus, as
part of the endowment of the treasurership of the cathedral church of
Exeter, to which it still belongs,[155] is valued at 22_l._ 10_s._
_per ann._[156]

  [Domesd. tom. i. fol. 121.    H. E.]


XXVII. SALTASH, _in the deanry_ of East.

ABBEY. The abbey[157] of Saltash in com. Devon, is mentioned in the
Year Books, _2 Hen. 4._ Mich. 45.


XXVIII. SYLLY.

BENEDICTINE CELL. In the biggest of the Sylly islands, called
Iniscaw,[158] was a poor cell of two Benedictine monks dedicated to
St. Nicholas, belonging to Tavistock abbey, even before the Conquest,
and confirmed to them afterward by K. Henry 1. Reginald earl of
Cornwall, &c.

  _Vide_ in Mon. Angl. tom. i: p. 516. cart. 1 Joan. p. 2. m. 65. Pat.
    19 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 5. et ibid. p. 1002. Cartas RR. Hen. 1. Ed. 1.
    Reginaldi com. Cornub. et Barthol. episc. Exon. ex registro
    Tavestochiensi.
  Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 19.
  Cart. 1 Joan. p. 1. n. 155 et 219. de decimis forestsæ de Guffaer.


XXIX. ST. SYRIAC,[159] St. Cyriac,[160] St. Carricius,[161] St.
Karrocus,[162] St. Cyret, _and_ Julette.[163]

CLUNIAC CELL. Hare was a small religious house of two Benedictine[164]
or Cluniac[165] monks, as early as K. Richard 1st’s time,[166] cell to
Montacute[167] in Somersetshire; and as parcel of the possessions of
that priory it was granted, _37 Hen. 8._ to Laurence Courtney.

  _Vide_ Mon. Angl. tom. i. p. 670, 671. tom. ii. p. 910.
  Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 37. vol. vii. p. 121.
  Pat. 15 Ed. 3. p. 1. m. 5. de concessione hujus cellæ Willelmo
    comiti Sarisb. per priorem et conv. de Monteacuto.
  [Report to the Originalia, vol. iv. fol. 155 b. Brit. Mus., where it
    is called St. Caroch.]


XXX. ST. THETHA, St. Teath _or_ St. Etha, _in the deanry of_ Trigge
Minor.

COLLEGE. The parish church here is sometimes on the records called
collegiate,[168] and consisted of two prebendaries[169] or
portionists,[170] who seem to have been collated by the bishop of
Exeter.


XXXI. TREBIGH, _or_ Turbigh.

KNIGHTS HOSPITALERS. A preceptory of Knights Hospitalers of St. John
of Jerusalem, to which Henry de Pomerai and Reginald Marsh were
considerable benefactors [Mon. Angl. tom. ii. p. 551.] It was valued
at 60_l._ _per ann._ [ms. Le Neve] but this with Ansty [Wilts.] was
valued, _26 Hen. 8._ at 90_l._ 1_s._ 9_d._ _in toto_. 81_l._ 8_s._
5_d._ _clare_. [ms. Valor, in off. Primit.] This among other
possessions of the old Knights, then undisposed of, was regranted to
the Hospitalers upon their restoration, 4 et 5 _Phil. et Mar._ and
after their dissolution, _16 Eliz._ to Henry Wilby and Geo. Blyth.


XXXII. TREGONY, _in the deanry of_ Powder.

ALIEN PRIORY. The advowson of the priory of Tregony, as belonging to
the abbey de Valle in Normandy, is mentioned fin. div. com. _52 Hen.
3._ n. 18. This priory with the advowsons of the churches of Tregony
and Biry were made over A.D. 1267, by the abbat and convent de Valle
in diœc. Bajoc. to the prior and convent of Merton.[171]

  _Vide_ inter munimenta eccl. cath. Exon. cartam abbatis et conventus
    de Valle, de resignatione hujus prioratus.
  [Bishop Lyttelton in a letter to Browne Willis, copied in MS. Cole,
    Brit. Mus. vol. xl. p. 59. says, “In the last edition of the
    Monastica Notitia the author queries if there was any Priory at
    Tregony in Cornwall. I find the original resignation thereof of the
    Abbat de Valle in Normandy to the Bp. of Exon, Peter Quivil, for the
    use of the Priory of Merton, together with the advowsons of the
    parish churches of Tregony and Bury, dated 1267.”             H. E.]


XXXIII. TRURO.

BLACK FRIERS. In the latter end of K. Henry 3d’s reign,[172] a convent
of Black friers settled in Kenwyn street.[173] Rauf Reskimer left a
benefaction, _2 Ed. 4._ to this house, of which his ancestors had been
founders. It was granted, _7 Ed. 6._ to Edward Aglianby.

  _Vide_ Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 27. vol. vii. p. 120.
  In Itin. Will. de Worcestre, p. 128, excerpta ex kalendario.
  Pat. 49 Ed. 3. p. 2. m. 26. pro manso elargando.
  Claus. 2 Ed. 4. n. 101. d.


XXXIV. TRUWARDRAITH,[174] Tuwardraz,[175] _or_ Tywardreit, _in the
deanry of_ Powder.

ALIEN PRIORY. An alien priory of Benedictine monks[176] belonging to
the abbey of St. Sergius and Bachus in Angiers,[177] founded before
A.D. 1169. by Champernulphus or Chambernon of Bere,[178] lord of the
manor of Tywardreith, or by the ancestors of Robert de Cardinan,[179]
perhaps Robert Fitz William. It was seised by the Crown during the
wars with France, and its farm then fixed at fifty marks _per
ann._[180] but being afterwards made denisen it continued till the
general suppression, about which time herein were seven monks,[181]
whose revenues were rated at 123_l._ 9_s._ 3_d._ _per ann._ Dugd.
151_l._ 16_s._ 1_d._ Speed. It was dedicated to St. Andrew, and
granted _34 Hen. 8._ to Edward earl of Hertford.

  _Vide_ in Mon. Angl. tom. ii. p. 586, 587. Cart. 33 Ed. 1. n. 38.
    recit. per inspeximus tres cartas Hen. 3. viz. primam recitant,
    cartam Roberti de Cardinan confirm, donationes antecessorum,
    secundam de ecclesia de Austel, tertiam de libertate sanctuarii
    S. Austeli.
  Lelandi Collect. vol. i. p. 76. ejusdam Itin. vol. iii. p. 14. 32,
    33. vol. vii. p. 120.
  In Libro Nigro Scaccarii, p. 131. de 1 fœd. mil. tent. de comite
    Reginaldo.
  In Rymeri Fœder. &c. vol. iv. p. 248. vol. viii. p. 106.
  Cart. 9 Ed. 2. n. 16. pro merc, et fer. apud Fowey, et lib. war. in
    Tywardreith, Trerant, Tremaynon, et Carigog.
  Claus. 4 Ed. 3. m. 27. de ten. in Fawy.
  [Harl. MS. 6959. p. 185. 6960. p. 34. 6961. pp. 30. 89.
  Repert. to Originalia, Brit. Mus. vol. iii. p. 273.
  MS. Cole, vol. xxvii. fol. 184 b.
  Lysons, Mag. Brit. Cornw.
  Gent. Mag. 2d vol. for 1822. Supp. p. 602.
  A great number of original grants, deeds, &c. relating to this
    priory from its foundation to its dissolution are at Wardour
    Castle, in the possession of Lord Arundel of Wardour; and extracts
    from a Calendar, with a list of the priors, has been lately
    published in the Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica, vol. iii.
    pp. 106-111.                                      H. E.]


_For_ TALCARN _see_ MINSTRE _in this county_.


ST. MARY DE VALLE _is omitted, as it probably was not in_ ENGLAND,
_see under_ Minstre _note_[135].


     [84] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 24. Taxat. Lincoln. p. 367.
     In registr. Bronscomb. the vicarage of St. Antonine in the
     patronage of Tywardreth.

     [85] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 30. vol. vii. p. 119. et
     Taxat. Lincoln. p. 638.

     [86] Tonkin, _Quære_.

     [87] Camden, edit. Gibson.

     [88] i. e. “Mansio monachorum.” Leland. Collect. vol. i. 75.

     [89] Hoveden, p. 567, 568.

     [90] Will. Malmsbur. de Pontif. lib ――――

     [91] What Leland saith of this monastery [Itin. vol. ii.
     114.] is very observable, viz. “That in St. Petroc’s church
     at Bodmin were first monks, then nuns, then Secular priests,
     then monks again, then canons; the last foundation was by
     Will. Warlewast bishop of Exon.” Mr. Speed further adds,
     that after the canons were Grey friers (but these last were
     in a distinct house of their own in this town; _vide infra_)
     he also tells us of a priory of Black canons founded by K.
     Ethelstan to the honour of S. Petrorsi at Bonury in this
     county, which in all probability was the same with this of
     St. Petroc at Bodmin.

     [92] This priory church is said to be now the parish church,
     [Tour through Great Britain, vol. ii. p. 4.] and the priory
     stood at the east end of the churchyard. [Leland. Itin. vol.
     iii. p. 12.]

     [93] Mr. Willis’ Parochiale, p. 179. has St. Laurence chapel
     and hospital in the parish of Lanivet and deanry of Pider.

     [94] Leland. Itin. vol. ii. p. 15. ms. Davies.

     [95] Magn. Brit. Antiq. et Nov.

     [96] _Quære_, Whether this was St. Antony’s or St. George’s
     hospital; for the will of John Killigrew, proved A.D. 1500,
     gives legacies “Pauper ibus S. Antonii de Bodmyn; pau
     peribus S. Georgii de Bodmin pauperibus S. Laurentii juxta
     Bod min.” Lib. Moore, Qu. xx.

     [97] Leland. Itin. vol. ii. p. 115.

     [98] Ibid.

     [99] Carew, f. 124. a.

     [100] Mr. Stevens has erroneously placed this house in
     Devonshire.

     [101] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 18. Camden. Britan, edit.
     Gibson, ad _Burien_.

     [102] Domesday, _Cornwall_. “Canonici S. Berianæ tenent
     Eglosberry, quæ fuit libera T. R. E. Ibi est una hida, &c.”

     [103] Mr. Ashmole’s History of the Garter, cap. 4. et Mon.
     Angl. tom. iii. p. ii. p. 73.

     [104] The dean is instituted and takes the oaths before the
     king as ordinary.

     [105] In Taxat. Lincoln, ms. “Ecclesia S. Endelientæ taxatur
     prout sequitur: Prebenda dom. Pagani de Liskered in eadem
     lx_s._ prebenda H. de Monkton iv_l._ x_s._ prebenda dom.
     Reginaldi iv_l._ ii_s._”

     [106] Thus the inquisition, Mon. Angl. ii. p. 5. but Leland,
     Coll. i. p. 75. saith, the Regulars were introduced by
     Bartholomew bishop of Exeter, who lived _temp. Hen. 2._

     [107] They were Benedictine monks according to Ryley, Plac.
     Parl. p. 466. But that is not right, for here were a prior
     and eight Black canons at the dissolution. Vide Willis, ii.
     Ap. p. 7.

     [108] Mr. Mores saith John Champernoun, sed quære.

     [109] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 23.

     [110] Ms. Valor. “St. Mary Magdalen,” Registr. Stafford, f.
     135.

     [111] Domesdei, “Canonici S. Carentoci tenent Langorock, et
     tenebant T.R.E. Sunt iii. hidæ, &c.”

     [112] So in my ms. Valor.

     [113] Eight prebendaries, without a dean. Tax. Lincoln, ms.
     A dean and ten prebendaries. Ms. Le Neve.

     [114] Prynne, ii. p. 736. many grants of the deanery and
     prebends here by the kings appear upon the rolls, but seem
     to be made during the vacancy of the see of Exeter. “A.D.
     1315. Feb. 22. Walterus episc. Exon. contulit Joanni de
     Sandale cancellario regis præbendam in ecclesia S.
     Karantoci.” Wharton de decan. Lond. p. 216.

     [115] In the former edition this church was confounded with
     that of St. Pieran: the late learned prelate Dr. Charles
     Littleton bishop of Carlisle informed Dr. Tanner of the
     mistake, and the account of both churches inserted in this
     edition are agreeable to the information communicated by
     him.

     [116] Domesday, “Canonici S. Achebranni tenent
     Lannachebran.”

     [117] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 25. vol. vii. p. 118. Tax.
     Linc. ms.

     [118] Carew’s Survey, f. 118. a.

     [119] Leland. Collect. vol. i. p. 76. not Regular canons of
     the order of St. Austin, as Magn. Brit. Antiq. et Nov. p.
     333.

     [120] Domesday, “Canonici S. Stephani tenent Lanstaveton.
     Ibi sunt iv. hidæ terræ, &c. De hoc manerio abstulit comes
     Moriton unum mercatum, quod ibi erat T.R.E.”

     [121] Plac. coram rege, 2 c. 2. Hill, rot. 20.

     [122] Leland. Itin. vol. ii. p. 109.

     [123] Not friers, as Magn. Brit. Antiq. et Nov. p. 333.

     [124] “And took the residew himself,” saith Leland [Itin.
     vol. ii. p. 110.] But in the recital of the donors and
     donations of this priory, made in the charter of king John,
     there is no mention at all of this bishop; but therein
     Reginald the son of K. Henry I. and earl of Cornwall seems
     to make the greatest figure, and he was certainly a
     considerable benefactor, if not founder of this new house,
     as he is said to be by Camden.

     [125] Here could not be less than twelve canons, for the
     prior and eleven subscribed to the supremacy, A. D. 1534. as
     Willis’ Abbies, vol. ii. p. 53.

     [126] And also in the register of Edm. Lacy bishop of Exon,
     marked _Lacy_, vol. iii.

     [127] Survey, f. 81. b. f. 116. b.

     [128] Carew, f. 68. a.

     [129] Lib. præced. B. 85.

     [130] Carew’s Survey, f. 81. b.

     [131] _Quære_, Perhaps the same with St. John Baptist
     chantry in this church. Willis’ Abbies, vol. ii. p. 54.

     [132] St. Matthew’s in Tanner. St. Mawes appears in the
     Exeter Registers and in Leland’s Itin. to be no other than a
     corruption of St. Mauduits. See Lacy’s Register, vol. iii.
     Leland Itin. vol. iii. 19. and Willis, Rot. Parl. vol. ii.
     p. 166.

     [133] Domesday, “Ecclesia S. Michaelis tenet Triwal, Brismar
     tenebat T.R.E. Ibi sunt ii. hidæ, quæ nunquam geldaverunt,
     &c. de his ii. hidis comes Moriton abstulit i. hidam.”

     [134] Not William, as Mr. Camden and Mr. Speed; this last
     author mentions the monasteries of S. Michael de Monte, and
     S. Michael de Magno Monte, as distinct religious houses in
     this county, for which I have not yet met with any other
     authority.

     [135] That Talcarn is the same with Minstre appears from the
     registers of the bishops of Exeter; where in the register of
     Bishop Branscomb, fol. 27. b. mention is made of “Talthar or
     Talcarne a cell to Tywardreth;” and in Bishop Stapeldon’s
     register, fol. 82. b. it is stiled “ecclesia de la Minstre
     alias de Talcarne.” Gervase of Canterbury, among other
     Cornish monasteries in his time, reckons Talcarn and St.
     Mary de Valle as cells of Black monks to Algiers, but I know
     not where the latter was situated, unless it was the same
     with S. Michael de Valle a priory in Guernsey. Mr. Burton
     and Mr. Speed have also these two houses, but they mistook
     the reading in the ms. of Gervase of Cant. who, in the
     column of the orders, hath, against these two and St.
     Anthony “mon. n. de Angs,” which they translated “Black
     monks of the Angells,” an order nowhere else to be met with.
     Black monks of Angiers seems most probable, and that they
     were cells to that foreign abbey, as Tywardreth certainly
     was, on which Talcarn appears to have been dependent.

     [136] Survey, f. 68.

     [137] Cressy’s Church History, p. 768. Leland. Collect, vol.
     iii. p. 13.

     [138] Domesday, “Clerici S. Neoti tenent Neotestou, et
     tenebant T.R.E. Ibi sunt ii. hidæ, quæ nunquam geldaverunt:
     iv. bordarii, &c. Totam hanc terram præter i. acram, quam
     presbiteri tenent, abstulit comes ab ecclesia.”

     [140] John of Glastonbury saith of St. Neot, that he was
     “dignis parentibus editus;” but his whole narrative is
     inconsistent with his being of royal birth.

     [141] Latest edition of Camden’s Britannia, col. 23.

     [142] Cressy’s Church History of England, p. 224. from
     archbishop Usher and Capgrave.

     [143] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 27.

     [144] Not of Oxford, as Speed.

     [145] Not A.D. 1288. as Mr. Camden and Speed; because bishop
     Bronscomb the founder died in 1280.

     [146] One of these prebends was annexed to the dignity of
     the archdeaconry of Cornwall. Leland saith there were twelve
     prebendaries. Itin. vol. iii. p. 27.

     [147] “Thirteen vicars.” Cart. fund. “Prebendaries, and
     other ministers. This college is strongly walled and
     incastell’d, having three strong towers, and guns at the but
     of the creke.” Leland, Itin. iii. 27.

     [148] Domesday, “Canonici S. Pierani tenent Lanpiran, quæ
     libera fuit T.R.E. De hoc manerio ablatæ sunt ii. hidæ, quæ
     reddebant canonicis T.R.E. firmam quatuor septimanarum, et
     decano xx. sol.”

     [149] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 24. ms. in bibl. Cotton.
     _Julius_, C. vi.

     [150] Plac. coram rege, 2 Ric. 2.

     [151] Domesday, “Canonici S. Probi tenent Lantrebois. Ibi
     est una hida.”

     [152] Plac. coram rege, 2 Rich. 2.

     [153] “A.D. 1258. dom. episc. Exon. contulit custodiam
     decanatus ecclesiæ S. Probi magistro Henrico de Bolish.”
     Reg. Bronscomb. episc. Exon.

     [154] Pat. 3 Hen. 4. a grant of a prebend in the church of
     S. Probus; four had pensions at the suppression.

     [155] And so it seems to have done, even at the time of the
     Lincoln taxation, 20 Ed. 1. where, among the dignities of
     the church of Exeter, “Thesauraria, præter ecclesiam S.
     Probi (quæ taxatur in archidiac. Cornub.) xx_l._”

     [156] Ms. Valor, in offic. Primitiarum.

     [157] _Quære_, Whether it ought not rather to be the rectory
     of Saltash in Cornwall, which now belongs to Windsor
     college.

     [158] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 19.

     [159] Gervase of Cant. et Speed.

     [160] Hen. Sulgrave, ms.

     [161] Mon. Angl.

     [162] Taxat. Lincoln. ms.

     [163] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 37.

     [164] Gervase of Cant. “Monachi Nigri.”

     [165] Montacute was of this order.

     [166] Because mentioned by Gervase of Cant. The church of
     St. Carric or Karentocus was given to Montacute by their
     founder; as Mon. Angl. ii. p. 910.

     [167] Leland. Itin. vol. vii. p. 121.

     [168] Pat. 25 Ed. 3. p. 1. m.. where is the grant of a
     prebend in this church by the crown, “Ratione temporalium
     episcopatus Exon. in manu regis existen.” The advowson of
     the vicarage is certainly in the bishop of Exeter.

     [169] Taxat. Lincoln, ms. 20 Ed. 1.

     [170] Portionarius ecclesiæ S. Tethæ Cornub. 25 Ed. 1.
     Prynne, iii. p. 703.

     [171] Ex informatione Reverendissimi Caroli nuper Episc.
     Carliol.

     [172] Their church was consecrated in the second year of
     bishop Walter Bronscomb. Registr. Bronscomb.

     [173] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 27. where he calls them
     White friers; but he mentions them as Black friers, Itin.
     vol. vii. p. 120.

     [174] Regist. Exon.

     [175] Tax. Lincoln, ms.

     [176] Registr. Exon. Ryley, p. 466. et Rot. 22 Ed. 1. but
     Leland [Collect. i. 76. Itin. vii. 120.] saith they were
     Cluny monks, by which name the foreign Benedictines were
     often called.

     [177] Registr. Exon. Rymer, iv. 243. claus. 1 Ed. 3. p. 1.
     m. 22. Not to St. Peter super Dynam Sagiensis diœc. as
     Rymer, viii. 106. et Mon. Angl. i. 1036.

     [178] Leland. Itin. vol. iii. p. 14.

     [179] Ibid. p. 6. Arundel of Lanhern of late taken to be
     founder.

     [180] Ms. Stow.

     [181] Ms. Corp. Christ. coll. Cant.




APPENDIX.

XI.

SOME DOCUMENTS RELATIVE TO THE PRIORY AT BODMIN.


  _Award of John Treffry, Thomas Brown, and others, in a Dispute
    between the Prior of Bodmyn and Richard Flamank, Esq., respecting
    Lands in Little Boscarn and Dynmur._

  (Cart. Antiq. Harl. Mus. Brit. 57. A. 35.)

To all maner men that this present wrytyng comyth to, John Treffry
efte Tremur, Thomas Brown, John Coche, and John Wythiell gretyng,
Where diverse discencion, discordis and debatis weryn bytwene Alan
priour of the priory of Bodmyn and his convent ther in the one party,
and Richard Flamank esquier, in that other party, of and yn certeyn
landys and tenementis with the appertenaunce in Litell Boscarn and
Dynmur, of which landis and tenementis in Litell Boscarn there assise
of novel disseisin hangith, and a writte of oyer and terminer of
trespas supposed there afore John Hale and Richard Neweton, Justis of
assise in the counte of Comwaill, assigned at the suyte of the said
Richard agenst the saide priour and other. To whiche the saide Richard
and the saide priour have putte ham yn arbitrement, ordinaunce, and
juggement of ous forsaide Thomas and John Wythiell arbitrours in the
party of the saide Richard chosen, and of ous forsaide John Tremur and
John Coche arbitrours in the party of the saide priour chosen, to
whiche arbitriment, ordinance, and juggement to stande and perfourme
for the party of the saide Richard, Jamys Flamank ys bonden by his
obligacion berynge date the Tywysday nexte after the Conversion of
Seynt Paule the yeer of reigne of Kyng Harry the Sexte twolthe, to the
saide priour in cc. pound. And the forsaide priour ys bounden by his
obligacion beryng date the same day and yeere to the saide Jamys yn
cc. pound to stande and perfourme in his party the saide arbitriment,
ordinaunce, and juggement as yn the same obligacions more pleynly ys
conteyned. Be hit to knowe to alle manner men by this present our
endentours, that we arbitrours forsaide arbitre, ordeyne, and ajugge
in the fourme as ensueth, that ys to wete, that the bounde that comyth
thurgh the doune lyinge bytween the lande of the saide priour and the
saide Richard, comynge to a stone standynge with oute a diche by
Dynmur wode yclepyd Kenediche in the north side of the said diche ther
of old tyme beynge abounde, ys and schall be a bounde bytwene the
saide priour and his successors and the saide Richard and his heyres;
and so goyng don to another stone standyng of olde tyme in a banke of
a grype; and fro that stone into another stone beyng of olde tyme a
bounde; and fro that stone to another stone by an oke, by ous new
pighte, and so the saide diche and the grype beyng several to the
saide Richard and to his heires, and so fro the ende of that grype
righte to the north west corner of Dynmur brigge by a bounde that we
have set, is and schall be the bounde bytwene the saide priour and his
successours, and the saide Richard and his heyres. And the saide
Rychard and his heyres schal have al the landys withynne the same
diche and boundys; and the saide Priour and his successours schal have
al the land, wode, and the mill called Dynmur mille, beynge with oute
the saide diche, gripe, and boundis, and also the saide Richard and
his heyres schall have alle the land bynethe the said brigge; and that
the saide priour and his successours schall have fre outefluvie and
curse of water fro the saide mille into the water of Alan, in the
manner as it rennith nowe; and also the saide priour and his
successours schall have fre goynge and comynge for him and for his
servaunts to purge and clense alle the saide curse of water, and to
caste the stonys and gravell, fenne and slyme, of the same lete, in
bothe sidys uppon the lande of the same Richard, there to abide and
not to cast ne hele the motys ne the kutte of the treys ther growynge,
and yf eny treys wyxen uppon the sides of the same water, in letting
other noysaunce of the curse or purgynge of the same water, thenne
that the saide priour may do warne the saide Richard and his heyres to
kutte and remove al suche treys, And but yf he so do with ynne sevene
dayes after suche warnynge, that then it schal be lufful and lawfull
to the saide priour and his successours and his servauntes to kutte
and remove alle suche treys and leve on the grounde of the saide
Richard. And also the saide priour, and his convent schal grante under
har comune seal to the saide Jamys for his costages and for to be good
frende to the saide priour and his successours havynge an annuyte of
syxantwenty schelyng an eghte pans to be take yeerly, terme of his
lyf, by the handys of the styward of the saide priour of the saide
hous, who that ever be priour, at the festis of Nativite of Seynt John
Baptiste and Cristismasse by evene portions, And if it be by hynde by
a moneth after every terme forsaide, if it be asket by the saide Jamys
other his servauntes that thenne it be lawfull to the forsaide Jamys
in al the lands of Wythiellgoos to distreyne; and that distrece so
take to imparke and inpounde it unto the tyme of the forsaide
syxantwenty schelynge and eghte pans satisfaccion be ymade togeder
with the arrerag, And also the forsaide priour and his successours
schal holde perpetually onys a yeer, that ys to wetynge at Seynt
Vincent ys day the obyt of Richard Flamank, Margaret his wyf, Jamys
Flamank, and Elizabeth his wyff, and Anne the daughter of the saide
Richard, and for all har good doerys, And also the forsaide Richard
and Jamys Flamank and her heires schal leve al maner of suytes the
whiche they have other maye have agenst the saide priour and convent
and alle other men as twochinge the materys and causes forsaide, And
also the saide priour and his successours schal leve al maner of
suytes the whiche they haue other mowe haue against the forsaide
Richard and Jamys Flamank, and all other men as twochynge the materys
and causes forsaide. To whiche arbitriment, ordinaunce, and juggement,
we foure arbitratours forsaide, to this our present endentours our
seales haue y put her to wytnys. Thomas Moyle maior of the burgh of
Bodmyn, John Corke, Thomas Bere of Bryn, John Nicoll, Walter Pole,
John Peyntor, Thomas Daunant, and other. I wryte at Bodmyn awendysday
nexte after the Conversion of Seynt Paule the year of reigne of our
soveraygne lord Kynge Harry the Sexte twolthe.


  _Award in a Dispute between Thomas Bishop of Megarence and Prior of
    the House and Churche of our Lady and St. Petrok of Bodmyn, and
    John Flamank, respecting Rothyn More._

  (Cart. Antiq. Har. 44. H. 20.)

To all true Cristen people to whom this present wrytyng indented shal
come to see or rede, we William Carnsuyowe esquire, Nicholas Opy, and
Cristofer Tredenek sende gretyng in our Lord God everlastyng; and
wheere afore this tyme that stryff, debate, and variance hath byn
hadde, movid, and yet hangith betwene the reverent fader in God Thomas
bisshop of Megarence and prior of the house and church of our Lady and
Seynt Petrok of Bodmyn in the right of the said house, of the oon
parte, and John Flamank of Bocarun esquire, of the other parte, of and
uppon the right, titill, and possession of certain landes called
Savelyn More, otherwyse called Rothyn more, sett and liyng in the same
more betwene the landes, tenementes and closes of the saide Fader in
God of the west parte called Savelyn closes, and the landes,
tenements, and closes of the said John Flamank called Rothyn, of the
est parte, And for asmoche as the said more so in variance hath be so
intrykyd with tynners ther wyrkyng nowe as in tymes passed, so that
the bounds and waters rynnyng in the same that sumtyme weere bounds
between the said parties, cannot be to us parfectly knowen, wheere
vppon the saide parties stande bounde either to other in xl^{ti li} by
ther severall oblicacions whois date is the last day of August in the
x^{th} yere of the raigne of Kyng Harry the viij^{th}, to abyde the
awarde and jugement of us the saide arbitrours of an uppon the
premyses. Wheere uppon we the said arbitrours, the fyrst day of
September the x^{th} yere of the raigne of Kyng Harry the viij^{th},
at the said more in variance called Rothyn more, called afore us the
saide reverent fader in God and the saide John Flamank, and theere and
then hyryng ther complynts, aunswers, reioynders, replicacions, and
wyttenes in every part examyned by goode deliberacion and avisement,
and also by the full aggrement and consent of both parties, fyrst we
awarde, judge, and deme that all the tolle tyn that shall be wrought
theere after the fest of Seynt Michell the arcangell nexte cornyng
after this present date, in the said more, shall be equally divided
and departed betweene the saide reverent fader and his successours,
priores of the saide house, of the one halfe for ever, and the other
halfe to the saide John Flamank and his heyres for ever, wiche shal be
wrought withyn the bounds and merkes hereafter folowyng; that is to
say, fro Rothyn brygge upward in all the saide More elonges by the
water that comyth from Tregewan to the closes of the saide fader in
God in the west side of the saide More to the closes and heyges of the
saide John Flamank in the est side of the saide more called Rothyn,
and so fro the saide brygge uppe alonge in the saide More to a certain
bounde and merke theere now redy made by a thorne, viz., a stone of
Bodyell gray with a hole in the hede pyzt ther by the said thorne, for
a bounde, and no furder; and if hit fortune hereafter any tyn in ther
severall grounde to ther owne use and no more in the same to departe.
And also we saide arbitrours adjuge and awarde that all the pasture
wode, fwell, and other casualties being or growyng within the
precyncte of the boundes afore by us rehersyd, to be ocupied and
devyded equally betwene the saide fader in God and his successours,
and the saide John Flamank and his heyres for ever, and that the saide
fader in God and his successours shal not cutt nor selle no wode nor
fwell theere growyng, without the aggrement and consent of the saide
John Flamank and his heyres, nayther the saide John Flamank and his
heyres shal not cut nor selle no wode nor fwell there growyng within
the precyncte of the saide bounde without the aggrement and consent of
the saide fader in God and his successours priours of the same house.
In wetenes wheereof to this our arbitrement we the foresaide William
Carnsuyowe esquire, Nicholas Opy, and Cristofer Treederick, have sette
our seales and subscribed with our handes. Ygeven at Bodmyn on the
fest of Seynte Michell the arcangell in the yere and raigne of Kyng
Harry the viij^{th} the x^{th} yere.

          Per me WILLIELMUM CARNSUYELLE,
          Per me NICOLAUM OPY,
          Per me CRISTOPHORUM TREDENEK.


  _The Prior of Bodmyn to Mr. Lock, complaining that the Canons refuse
    to live up to the Rules set them by their Visitor._

  (From the Orig. MS. Cotton. Cleop. E. IV. fol. 116.)

Maister Lok, I harttili recommend me unto you; so thankyng you for
your gret kyndeness and payne that ye have take for me, which I trust
wons God wyllyng to recompens. Syr, I am sore disquieted with a sort
of unthryfty chanons, my convent, and there berars, which of long
contynuans has lyvyd unthriftili, and agene the gode order of
relygyon, to the grete sklaunder of the same, as all the contrey can
tell; for the reformacyon thereof, the buschope yn hys late visitacyon
gave cartayne and dyvers injuncions commandyng me straytle to see
obseruyd and kept; which ar noo harder than our owne rule and
profession byndis us, and as alle other relygyus men use and observe
where gode relygion is observed and kept. Wherewith they be sore
greved, and yntend the most parte of them to depart with capacitise,
with owt my concent and wylle, and won of them hathe purchased a
capacyte the last terme, without my lycence, which is agene the words
of his capacite, wherefor I have restrayneyd his departyng, for no
gret los that I showld have of hym, but for the yl example to other;
for yf I should suffer this man to depart yn thys manner I shal have
never a chanon to byde with me. I am sore threttyned with won Mr.
Roger Arundell a gret berar and mayntynar of my bretherne agenst me,
and the procurar of there capacites, to be browght before the kyngs
graces honourable councell, for that I have not suffered this lewde
chanon to depart with his capacite accordyng to there yntent. I pray
you harttili to shew this mater to my gode Mr. Secretary desieryng
hym, as my speciall trust ys yn hym yf, anney complaints cum to hym,
as I dowt not but that there wol, yt may plese hym to refer the
examynation of the mater to Sir John Arundell, Sir Peter Eggecumbe,
Sir John Chamond, or any other discrete gentilmen yn the contrey what
so ever, so that I cum not to London as there purpose ys, which showld
be to gret a charge for me to bere, my hous beyng sore yndetted all
redye. This gentilman hathe procured a commyssion, as I am informyd,
to pull down a were longyng to my pore hows, which hathe stand up thes
ccccc yere and more. If nede be I wol wryte more of this mater by Mr.
Hill. Thus fare ye as wol as yoʳ gentil harte can thynke, and all my
gode frends and loviers, to home pray you have harttili commendid.
From 28 Maij by yoʳ owne for ever.

                                               THOMAS prior there.


BODMYN.

(In a Book of Pensions remaining in the Augmentation Office.)

Hereafter ensuythe the namys of the late p^{r}or and convente of Bodmyn,
in the countye of Cornwall, w^{t} the annuall pencons assigned unto them
by vertue of the Kyngs highnes comyssion the xxvij^{th} daye of February
in the XXX^{th} yere of the reigne of oʳ most drade souũeigne lorde Kyng
Henry the viij^{th}, the furst payment of the saide pen[~co]ns and e[~v]y
of them to begynne at the feaste of th’annūcia[~co]n of o^{r} blessed
Lady next comyng for one q^{u}rrt, and so after, that to be payde ev’y
halfe yere duryng their lyffs; according to the rate hereafter
specyfied――

                      That is to say,

  Furst, Tho[=m]s Wannysworth p^{r}or       lxvj^{li} xiij^{s} iiij^{d}
  Richarde Olyver, supp^{i}o^{r}            viij^{li}
  Richarde Luer, blynde and of th’age
    of one hundrethe yeres                  x^{li} & vj dussen wodes yerly.
  Benett Smythe                             vj^{li}
  Tho[=m]s Rosemonde                        vj^{li}
  John Wylcoke                              cvj^{s} viij^{d}
  Tho[=m]s Marshall                         cvj^{s} viij^{d}
  John Dagle                                cvj^{s} viij^{d}
  Michell Flemyng                           xl^{s}
  John Beste                                xl^{s}
  Tho[=m]s Rawlyns, blynde and aged,
    for his corrody yerly                   xl^{s}
  S[=m] of all the pen[~co]ns aforesaide    cxviij^{li} xiij^{s} iiij^{d}
                                            Jᵒ TREGONWELL,
                                            WILLIAM PETRE,
                                            JOHN SMYTH.

  Fiant pensiones religiosis predictis.     RYCHARD RYCHE.


_Valor Ecclesiasticus tempore Henr._ VIII.

(From the First Fruits’ Office.)

                       _Spiritualia._

  Com. Cornubiæ.
    Bodmin     Decim. Garb                         £7   2   3
               Decim. Personal’                     6   4   1
               Oblac’ ad Virginem Mariam            0  10   6
    Mynfrey    Decim. Garb                         14  13   6
    Cutberte   Decim. Garb                         17  10   0
    Padistowe  Decim. Garb                         14   9   6
               Decim. Pisc                          4   0   0
               Oblac                                2   0   0
    Lanhidiok  Garb                                 4   2   0
               Oblac                                0   2   2
               Decim. Personal                      0   8   0
               Aliis Profic’ ibidem                 1   0   0
                                                   ――――――――――
                                                  £72   2   0

                       _Temporalia._

    Bodmyn, Lanhiderok,
      Fosnewith, et Bree.  Redd. et Firm.         £74  18   7
    Pendewey               Redd. et Firm.          24   0   0
    Bodynell               Redd. et Firm.           7   0   8
    Wythiell               Redd. et Firm.          11  12   5
    Rialton Libera         Redd. et Firm.          27   0   0
            Infra          Redd. et Firm.          22   0   0
    Retergh                Redd. et Firm.          10  13   4
    Elynglase              Redd. et Firm.          14  10   0
    Padistowe              Redd. et Firm.          10   7   5
  Com. Devon.
    Newton Petrok          Redd. et Firm.           7   9   6
    Holcomb                Redd. et Firm.           5   1   0
    Vendic. Bosc                                    3   0   0
                                                 ――――――――――――
  Summa Valoris, tam Spiritual’ quam Temporal’   £289  11  11
                                                 ============


_Comput. Ministrorum Domini Regis temp. Hen. VIII._

(Abstract of Roll, 31 Hen. VIII. Augmentation Office.)

BODMIN PRIORATUS.

  Com. Cornub.
    Bodmyn       Scit’ cum Terr. Da[=n]ical’ Firm.  £8 17 10
    Bodmyn Maner’ cum Capell. de Langhidrocke
                 Redd. libor’ Tenenc’               7  0  0
                 Redd. tam Custom. quam
                    Convenc’. Tenen                15 19  0
    Braye                     Firma                 1  6  8
    Langcarne                 Firma                 0  0  1
    Newnam                    Firma                 0  0  1
    Langhydroke cum Capell.   Firma                 1  0  0
    Bodmyn Terr. D[=n]ical.   Firma                13  3  5
    Bodmyn Villa        Feod’ Firma                 5 10  0
                 Perquis. Cur.                      0 19  0
    Pendevye    Redd. tam Custom. quam Convenc’.
      Tenen                                        25  2  8
                 Perquis. Cur                       0  8  0
    Bodynyell Maner.          Firma                 5  0  0
    Wythiell Maner.           Firma                10  0  0
    Rialton et Retargh Maner. cum hundred. de
      Petherschel al’ Pether  Redd. Assis          83  1  7½
                       Firma Terr. D[=n]ical       15  6  8
    Elynglas et Kelsey Maner. in quadam Insula
                 voc’ the Gull Rock       Firma    18 17  0
    Newton Petrocke et Halcombe           Firma    12 10  6
    Paddestowe Maner. cum memb. ac cert.
                Terr. in Lanlesyke.       Firma    20  8  6½
    Bodmyn Menstre et Paddestowe  Decim’ Garb.     54  0  0
    Bodmyn Sanct. Cuthbert        Decim’ Garb.     19  0  0
                    Decim’ Prædial et Minut.        6  4  1
    Trenowe in Tyntagell Por[~co]  Decim’ Garb.     0  6  8
    Paddestow       Firm. Decim. Pisc. &c.         10  0  0
    Eglosayll’           Penc’                      2  0  0




APPENDIX.

XII.

EARLS OF CORNWALL.


The following account of the different individuals who have held the
office of Prince or Earl of Cornwall from the earliest times, till the
period of its becoming merely nominal, excepting as to emolument and
patronage, with the new appellation of Duke, under the fantastic
settlement of King Edward the Third, is derived from Dugdale’s
Baronage.


EARLS OF CORNWALL ANTE CONQU:

Anno 499. Of this county was Gorlois Earl, in the time of Uther
Pendragon, King of the Britons, of whom this is reported.[182] That
Uther determining to solemnize the Feast of Easter at London, with
great honor, appointed all his nobles to be thereat, amongst which,
this Gorlois then was, together with Igerna his wife, whose beauty did
surpass all other British women, so that the king fell in love with
her, and courted her with all delicates; which being discerned by the
Earl, he retired speedily into his country without leave; the king,
therefore, being highly incensed against him for so doing, hasted
after him into Cornwall, and fired divers of his towns, and at length
besieged him at Dimilioch, provoked him to come out to battle, which
he did so inconsiderately, he being one of the first mortally wounded,
his followers disperst themselves. After whose death the king took
Igerna to wife, and begot on her a son, called Arthur, who became
afterwards not a little famous.

Anno 517. The next Earl was Cador,[183] who when King Arthur had
besieged Colgrine, the Saxon General in the City of York,
understanding that Baldulph the brother of Colgrine, expecting the
coming of more Saxons upon the sea coast, designed to fall upon King
Arthur in the night time, Arthur having notice thereof by his scouts,
sent this valiant Cador with six hundred horse, and three thousand
foot, who, meeting the enemy unexpectedly, slew many of them, and
routed the rest.

Anno 520. About three years after,[183] upon another invasion of the
Saxons, and a great battle fought with them near Bathe in
Somersetshire, wherein Colgrine and Baldulph (before mentioned) lost
their lives; and Cheldric the other principal leader of them, with the
remaining part of their forces, were put to flight, this Earl Cador,
by King Arthur’s command, pursued them into the Isle of Thanet, slew
Cheldric, and forced the rest to yield themselves to his mercy.

Anno 542. This noble Cador left issue Constantine,[183] whom King
Arthur at his death appointed to be his successor in his kingdom of
Britain.

The next Earl was Godric,[184] of whom I have seen no other mention
than that Egelwold, sometime King of England, leaving no other issue
that survived him, but one daughter, named Goldusburgh, (six years of
age at his death) committed her to the tuition of this Godric, who
afterwards gave her in marriage to Haveloc, son to Birkelan King of
Denmark.

In the time of King Æthelred, Ailmer, or Æthelmare, (for so he was
also called) was Earl of this county, who being a person of singular
piety, founded[185] first of all the Abbey of Cerne in Dorsetshire, in
the days of King Edgar, and had so great a veneration to the memory of
Eadwan, brother of S. Edmund the Martyr, who led[185] an hermit’s life
in Dorsetshire,[186] before mentioned, near to a certain spring called
the Silver Well, that with the help of Dunstan (Archbishop of
Canterbury) he translated his relics to the old church of Cernel, then
the parish church.

After this, scil. in An. 1005 (in the time of King Ethelred,) he
founded[187] the Abbey of Eynesham in Oxfordshire, and likewise[188]
the Priory of Bruton in Somersetshire, (all Monks of the Benedictine
Order) which he amply endowed, as by the authorities which I have here
cited will appear; though in that of Bruton, canons of S. Augustine
were afterwards placed.

This Ailmer was[189] also Earl of Devonshire, under which title, in
the year 1013, when[189] Suane, King of Denmark, overrun the greatest
part of the land with his army, and forced King Ethelred to betake
himself unto the city of Winchester for refuge, he with all the great
men of the West, fearing the tyranny of the Danes, submitted[189]
themselves to Suane, and gave hostages[189] for their peaceable
obedience unto him. And about three years after this, when King Edmond
Ironside fought so stoutly against King Canute, (son to the same
Suane) he joining[190] with that traitorous Eadric Streone, Earl of
Mercia, and Earl Algar, adhered[190] to Canute.

Of his issue there nothing more appeareth, than that he left a
son[191] called Æthelward, who in the year 1018 was killed[191] by
King Canute, together with that great traitor Eadric Streone, Earl of
Mercia.


ROBERT, EARL OF CORNWALL.

To this Earldom was Robert, Earl[192] of Moreton in Normandy,[192]
brother to King William by the mother, shortly[192] after the Conquest
advanced, and had other great honours given[192] him in this realm.

In the time of King William Rufus, taking[193] part with his brother
Odo, Earl of Kent, in that insurrection on the behalf of Robert
Curthose, he held[194] the castle of Pevensey on that account; but so
soon as the King laid siege thereto, rendered[194] it up to him, and
made his peace.

This Earl having had[195] the standard of Saint Michael carried before
him in battle, as the words of his charter do import (under which it
is to be presumed he had been prosperous) did, out of great devotion
to God and the Blessed Virgin, for the health of his soul and the soul
of his wife, as also for the soul of the most glorious King William
(for those are his expressions) give[196] the Monastery of S. Michael,
at the Mount in Cornwall, unto the Monks of S. Michael de Periculo
Maris in Normandy, and to their successors in pure alms.

To the Abbey of Grestein in Normandy[197] founded by Herlwine de
Contevill, his father, he was a great benefactor, for he gave[198]
thereunto the lordships of Gratings and Broteham in Suffolk, and the
tithe of Cambis, as also his lands at Saisinton in Cambridgeshire;
which place of Gratings (now Cretings) was a cell to that foreign
monastery. He likewise[198] gave thereto the manor of Wilminton in
Sussex, where also there was a cell for monks of that religious house;
and in Ferlis[198] five hides of lands. In Pevensel he gave[198] them
the house of one Engeler; and in his Forest of Pevensel, granted to
them pannage and herbage, with timber for repair of their churches and
houses, as also fuel for fire.

He gave moreover to that Abbey of Grestein half the fishing of
Langeney, and the whole tithe of that fishing, as also the churches of
Eldene, Wesdene, and Ferles, and one hide of land at Heetone. But
whereas he found that the greatest part of the possessions which
belonged to the Priory of St. Petroc at Bodmin in Cornwall, founded by
King Æthelstan, had been[199] taken from the same, and enjoyed by
canons secular, he therefore seised[199] upon the remainder, and
converted them to his own use.

When he departed this world, I do not find; but if he lived after
William Rufus so fatally lost his life by the glance of an arrow in
New Forest from the bow of Walter Tirell; then was it unto him that
this strange apparition happened, which I shall here speak of,
otherwise it must be to his son and successor Earl William,――the
story[200] whereof is as followeth. In that very hour that the king
received that fatal stroke, the Earl of Cornwall being hunting in a
wood distant from that place about two ―――― and left alone by his
attendants, was accidentally met by a very great black goat, bearing
the king all black, and naked, and wounded through the midst of his
breast; and adjuring the goat by the Holy Trinity to tell what that
was he so carried, he answered, “I am carrying your King to judgment,
yea that tyrant William Rufus, for I am an evil spirit, and the
revenger of his malice which he bore to the church of God, and it was
I that did cause this his slaughter; the protomartyr of England, St.
Alban, commanding me so to do; who complained to God of him for his
grievous oppressions in this Isle of Britain, which he first
hallowed,” all which the Earl related soon after to his followers.

This Earl Robert took to wife[201] Maud, daughter to Roger de
Montgomery (Earl of Shrewsbury) which Maud was also a great
benefactress to the Monks of Grestine in Normandy, by the gift[202] of
Conoc, consisting of ten hides, and two hides in Bodingham, with the
church of that place, as also one house in London, with all customs
thereto belonging. Moreover, she gave[202] unto them two and thirty
hides of land which she had of Roger de Montgomery her father, viz. at
Harinton eight, at Mersen eleven, at Hiteford six, at Langeberge two,
at Tavistone three and an half, and at Clavendon three yards land.

By this Maud he had issue[203] WILLIAM, who succeeded him in these
earldoms of Moreton and Cornwall, and three daughters, whose Christian
names are not expressed; whereof the first was wife[203] to Andrew de
Vitrei; the Second to[203] Guy de la Val; the third to the Earl of
Thoulouse, brother to Raymond Count of St. Giles, who behaved himself
so valiantly in the Jerusalem expedition.

The lands whereof he was possessed at the time of the Conqueror’s
Survey,[204] were in Sussex, fifty-four manors, besides the borough of
Pevensel; in Devonshire seventy-five, besides a church and a house in
Exeter; in Yorkshire an hundred and ninety-six; in Wiltshire five; in
Dorsetshire forty-nine; in Suffolk ten; in Hantshire one; in Middlesex
five; in Oxfordshire one; in Cambridgeshire five; in Hertfordshire
thirteen; in Buckinghamshire twenty-nine; in Gloucestershire one; in
Northamptonshire ninety-nine; in Nottinghamshire six; and in Cornwall
two hundred and forty-eight, having two castles, one at Dunhevet, the
other at Tremeton.

William, succeeding Earl Robert his father in the earldom of Moreton
in Normandy, and this of Cornwall, being a person[205] of a malicious
and arrogant spirit from his childhood, envied the glory of King Henry
the First; and not contented with those two earldoms, demanded from
King Henry the earldom of Kent as his right, which earldom his uncle
Odo (the Bishop) formerly had, giving out[205] privately, that he
would not put on his robe, unless that inheritance which he challenged
by descent from his uncle might be restored to him, unto which demand,
the King at first, considering[205] his own unsettled condition,
gave[205] a subtile and dilatory answer; but when[205] he discerned
that those clouds, from whence he doubted a storm, were over, he not
only denied[205] his request, but began to question him for whatsoever
he possessed unrightfully; yet (that he might not seem to oppose what
was just) modestly yielding[205] that he should have a lawful trial
for the same; but with that judicial sentence, which thereupon ensued,
this Earl being highly displeased, in a great rage got over into
Normandy, and there besides some fruitless attempts which he made
against the King’s castles, having an evil eye towards Richard Earl of
Chester (son of Hugh) made[206] no little spoil upon his lands, though
he was then but a child, and in the King’s tutelage; from which time,
together with Robert de Bellesme, Earl of Shrewsbury, he ceased
not[206] to foment a rebellion in those parts. Anno 1103.

4th H. I. 1104. The king therefore discerning these his practises,
seised[207] upon all his possessions here in England, razed[208] his
castles to the ground, and banished[208] him this realm.

And not long after passing[208] over into Normandy to quench those
flames which these two earls had made by joining with Robert Curthose
(who thought himself injured, that his younger brother Henry had made
himself King,) subdued[208] (anno 1106) all that power which there
appeared against him, and at length laid siege to Tenerchebray (a town
belonging to this[208] Earl). For the raising whereof Duke Robert with
this William, and Robert de Belesme, and many other came[209] with a
great army, where a short fight[210] ensued, this earl leading[211]
the van, and Robert de Belesme the rear; and of the king’s army,
Ranulf de Bajorsis (an eminent baron) the van, and Robert Earl of
Mellent the rear. The armies thus disposed, our Earl William made
the[212] onset upon Ranulf with extraordinary courage, but could not
break through his troops, they stood so stoutly to it. The front on
both sides thus maintaining their ground, Helias Earl of Maine, (on
the King’s part) fell upon the flank of the enemy’s foot, who being
not well armed, were soon shattered, which disorder, being observed by
Robert de Bellesme, he began to fly with the rear; whereupon, the King
soon obtained an absolute victory, the duke himself being made
prisoner, and all his principal adherents, amongst which, this Earl,
being taken by the Britains, from whose hands the king and his friends
had much ado to get him, was sent prisoner into England, there to be
secured during his life.[213] After which, the king causing his eyes
to be put out, bestowed[214] his earldom of Moreton upon Stephen of
Blois (son of Stephen Earl of Champaine), whom he then honoured with
knighthood, who was after King of England.

This Earl William built[215] the castle of Montacute in Somersetshire,
and called it by that name from the sharpness of the hill on which he
did set it, and likewise founded[216] a priory near thereto, which he
amply endowed, annexing it as a cell to the Abbey of Cluny in
Burgundy.

He also gave[217] to the Abbey of Bee in Normandy his lordship of
Preston in the Rape of Pevensel in Sussex, and was buried[218] in the
Abbey of Bermondsey in Southwark; but when he died, I find no mention,
nor of either wife or issue that he had.


REGINALD EARL OF CORNWALL.

This Reginald was[219] one of the illegitimate sons of King Henry the
First, (begotten, as it is generally believed,[220] on the daughter of
Robert Corbet,) and surnamed[221] de Dunstanvill.

In 3 Stephen, he was a stout adherer[221] to Maud the Empress, against
Stephen; but afterwards falling off, was in anno 1140 (5 Steph.)
made[222] Earl of Cornwall by that king. Howbeit, after this, being
surprised in Cornwall, at a certain castle then in the power of the
king, by one William Fitz Richard (a person of a noble extraction and
ample fortune in those parts) violating his faith to that king, he
married the daughter of this William,[223] and thereupon reduced that
whole country to his will, grievously oppressing all the king’s party,
and not sparing what was sacred, insomuch as he underwent the sentence
of ex-communication for so doing by the Bishop of Exeter. The king
therefore hearing of these his rebellious practices, marched suddenly
thither with a powerful army, and recovering those strong-holds by him
gained, committed[224] them to the trust of Earl Alan (of Richmond).

After this, scil. in 6 Steph. he was[225] in that fatal battle of
Lincoln, against King Stephen; but ere long, the tide turning, by the
success which the king had in taking[226] the Castle of Forandune, in
com. Berks, which Robert Earl of Gloucester had built on the behalf of
the empress, being by her sent with overtures of peace to the king, he
was taken by Philip, a younger son to that earl, who had revolted to
the king’s side.

After which time I find no more mention of him till 2 Henry II. that
he had the lordship of Meleburne, in com. Somerset, given[228] him by
King Henry, as also[229] the manors of Karswill and Depeford, with the
hundreds.

In 10 Henry II. he endeavoured (for the king’s honour as it is said) a
reconciliation betwixt King Henry and Thomas Becket, then Archbishop
of Canterbury; which not taking effect, he was the next year sent[231]
to visit him in his sickness, and after that to[232] acquaint him with
the judgment given against him.

Furthermore, upon the levying of that aid, in 12 Henry II. for
marrying the king’s daughter, he certified[233] his knights’ fees to
be two hundred and fifteen and a third part in Cornwall and
Devonshire; for which, in 14 Hen. II. he paid[234] two hundred and
fifteen marks, 4_s._ 5_d._ besides[234] £59. 6_s._ 8_d._ for the
knights’ fees of Richard (de Redvers) Earl of Devon.

Moreover, in 19 Henry II. upon that rebellion of Robert Earl of
Leicester, on the behalf of young Henry (the king’s son), he
marched[235] against him (with the Earl of Gloucester) to St.
Edmondsbury, and the year following joined with[236] Richard de Luci
(at that time Justice of England) in the siege of Leicester, then held
out by the forces of the earl, which town they took,[236] though not
the castle.

This Earl Reginald, for the health of the soul of King Henry his
father, gave[237] to the monks in the Isle of Sully, all the wreck of
sea happening upon that island, excepting Wales, and any whole ship.
And departing[238] this life at Certesey in anno 1175 (21 Hen. II.)
was buried[238] at Reading, having issue four daughters, viz. ――――
married[239] to Richard de Redvers, Lord of the Isle of Wight; Maud,
to[240] Robert Earl of Mellent; Ursula, to[240] Walter de Dunstanvill;
and Sarah, to[241] the Viscount of Limoges, who had,[241] in frank
marriage with her, the moiety of the manor of Thiwernhy in Cornwall.

He also left issue[242] two sons, but illegitimate; the one
called[242] Henry FitzCount, begotten[242] on the body of Beatrix de
Vaus, lady of Torre and Karswell; which Henry, through the bounty of
King Henry the Second, had a grant[242] of the whole county of
Cornwall, as also of[242] the manors of[242] Bradeneth and Ocford,
with other lands in com. Devon, and the lordship of Karswell, by the
gift[242] of Beatrix his mother.

The other son was called[242] William.

Upon the death of this Reginald, the king retained[243] the Earldom of
Cornwall in his own hands, and likewise all his lands in England and
Wales, for the use of John his own son (afterwards king),
excepting[243] a small proportion to his daughters before mentioned.


I come now to Henry (the older of his illegitimate sons) in regard he
was a person of note in his time.

This Henry, by the name[244] of Henry FITZ-COUNT, had in 4 Joh. an
assignation[244] of £20 (current money of Anjou) for his support in
that king’s service at Roan; and about that time gave[245] twelve
hundred marks for the lands of William de Traci, which lands Hugh de
Curtenai and Henry de Traci afterwards enjoyed.

In 17 Joh. this Henry had from the king a grant[246] of the whole
county of Cornwall, with the demesnes, and all other its
appurtenances, to farm, until the Realm should be in peace, and the
king clearly satisfied whether he ought to hold it by right of
inheritance, or as part of the demesne of the crown; and being then
made constable[247] of the castle at Lanceston, rendered[247] up the
government of the castle of Porcestre, which he had formerly held.
Moreover, by the assent[248] of that king, he held[248] the town and
castle of Totneis, as also[248] the manors of Corneworth and
Lodeswell, which Reginald de Braose formerly had by the grant of King
Henry the Second. And 1 Hen. III. obtained another grant[249] of the
county of Cornwall, with all its appurtenances, to hold in as full and
ample manner as Reginald Earl of Cornwall held it, and not to be
disseised thereof, but by judgment of the King’s Court.

In 4 Hen. III. it appears[250] that he stood indebted to the king in
five hundred ninety-seven pounds and one mark, which was due by him to
King John for the honour of Braeles (alias Broeneis), and that the
same year disobeying[251] the king’s commands, as also stubbornly
departing[251] the court without leave, the king discharged all his
subjects,[251] and in particular those of Cornwall, from having
anything to do with him. Howbeit, soon after, through the
mediation[251] of the Bishops of Norwich, Winchester, and Exeter, as
also[251] of Hubert de Burgh (then Justice of England) and some
others, giving[252] up the Castle of Lanceston, and the county of
Cornwall, with all the homage and services thereto belonging, as fully
as King John enjoyed them at the beginning of the war which he had
with his barons, his peace[252] was then made with a _salvo jure_, &c.
saving the right he pretended to for that county, wherein the king was
to do him justice when he should come of age.

But that as it seems was never done: for certain it is that the king
did not arrive to his full age till long after the death of this
Henry, it being evident[253] that he died about two years after, viz.
in 6 Hen. III. whereupon command was given to the Sheriff of Cornwall,
that he should permit his executors to enjoy all his goods, and
likewise the rents of all his lands whereof he was possessed when he
went to Hierusalem for the full term, for all those who were signed
with the cross.

It is by some thought that this Henry succeeded his father in the
Earldom of Cornwall, in regard that King Henry the Third in the first
year of his reign granted to him the county of Cornwall, with all its
appurtenances, as is above expressed. But considering that the title
of earl was never attributed to him after that time, I cannot conceive
anything more passed by that grant, than the barony or revenue of that
county. For it is observable, that in patent[254] to Richard Duke of
Gloucester, by King Edward the Fourth, whereby he grants him Castrum,
Comitatum, Honorem, et Dominium Richmundiæ, there passed no more than
the mere Seignorie, otherwise he would not have omitted the title of
Earl thereof amongst his styles. The like may be noted of Raphe Earl
of Westmerland, who had Castrum, Comitatum, Dominium, et Honorem
Richmundiæ granted[255] to him by King Henry the Fourth, yet never
enjoyed the title of Earl of Richmond.


RICHARD EARL OF CORNWALL.

Of this county, Richard, a younger son to King John (for he calls
him[256] filius noster) had the title of Earl in the time of King
Henry the Third. Of him the first mention I find is in 16 Joh. the
king then directing his precept[257] to Peter de Rupibus, Bishop of
Winchester, (at that time Justice of England) for livery (though then
very young) of all the lands of Roese de Dovor, whom he had
married,[257] she being in the custody[257] of William de Brewer; but
not long after this (notwithstanding his tender years) he was, in 1 H.
III. constituted governor[258] of Chileham Castle in Kent, and the
next ensuing year obtained a grant[259] from the king of the honour of
Walingford.

Moreover, in 5 Hen. III. he had a grant[260] of the honour of Eye, to
hold during pleasure, (which shortly after was rendered to the Duke of
Lovain, the right owner thereof); and in 9 Hen. III. had the like
grant[261] of the custody of the county of Cornwall (_id est_ the
sherevalty) during the king’s pleasure, Henry de Berkering being his
substitute.

In this 9th year of Henry III. he was girt[262] with the sword of
knighthood, upon Candlemas Day, with ten other noble persons who were
designed for his service; and soon after accompanied[263] William
Longespe, Earl of Salisbury, (his uncle,) into Gascoigne, having
letters of[263] recommendation from the King to the Archbishop and
Citizens of Burdeaux, who gladly welcoming him thither, assisted[263]
him with their best advice for recovery of those lost territories;
whereupon he raised[264] forces in all those parts, having had from
the king (before he set out of England) a grant of the county of
Cornwall, with all Poictou, for which respect he was generally
called[264] Earl of Poictou; and marching into the country, in a short
time subjugated[264] all those places by force which declined to do
homage to him, receiving a supply[265] of Welsh from hence, with a
large[265] sum of money.

It is reported,[266] that whilst he lay at the siege of the castle of
Riole, hearing of the approach of the Earl of March, he divided his
army, and with part thereof, keeping the seige with the rest, gave him
battle, and obtained an absolute victory, whereby he gained all their
baggage, and took many prisoners; and not long after this, having
merited so well by these his successful beginnings, upon the third day
of Pentecost (id est, 3 calend. Junii, 11 Hen. III.) was advanced
to[267] the title and dignity of Earl of Cornwall, at Westminster,
with great solemnity.

But within a while after there grew much difference[268] betwixt him
and the king his brother, touching a certain lordship given to Waleran
Teutonicus (id est, Ties) by King John, which he alleged[268] to be
parcel of the Earldom of Cornwall, and caused possession to be taken
of it for himself; whereupon, Waleran making a complaint, the king
first wrote to him about it, and then sent for him, commanding the
render thereof, which he refused to do, challenging the judgment of
his peers as to matter of right. Whereat the king took such offence
that he required him forthwith to do it, or depart the realm; unto
which he answered, that he would not deliver up the land, nor, without
the sentence of his peers, go out of the kingdom; and in great
discontent departing went[268] to his own house; which breach betwixt
the king and him caused Hubert de Burgh (then justice of England, and
in chief power at court) to advise the king to surprise him in his bed
the next night following, lest he should raise a disturbance in the
realm; but being privily advertised of that design, he fled
immediately away, making no stop till he got[269] to Reading; and
thence hasting to Marlborough, there found his trusty friend William
Mareschal, Earl of Pembroke, unto whom having made relation of what
had passed, they took their course to the Earl of Chester; and being
thus got together, through the power and interest of their friends
raised a potent army, making their rendezvous at Stanford, whence they
sent a minatory message to the king, but imputing all the fault to
Hubert de Burgh, requiring a confirmation of that charter of the
forest which had been cancelled at Oxford. The king, therefore,
discerning this cloud, appointed a meeting at Northampton upon the
third of the nones of August next following, assuring them that he
would there do full right unto all; where meeting accordingly, for
their better satisfaction (amongst other his condescensions) he gave
this Earl Richard his mother’s dowry, with all the lands in England
which did appertain to the Earl of Britanny, as also those which
belonged to the Earl of Bolein, then deceased[270]; whereupon, he had
livery[271] of the whole county of Rutland. And in 15 Henry III.
obtained another grant[272] of the inheritance of the honour of
Walingford, with the castle and all its appurtenances, as also the
manor of Watlington, to hold by the service of three knights’ fees;
likewise, of all the lands in England[272] which Queen Isabell (the
king’s mother) held in dower, and of those which belonged to Robert de
Drewes, and to the Duke of Lorrain (at that time seised into the
king’s hands), to hold until such time as the king should restore
them.

Moreover, he then procured another grant[272] of the whole county of
Cornwall, with the stanneries and mines, to be held of the king and
his heirs by the service of two knights’ fees, bearing at that time
the title[272] of Earl of Cornwall and Poictou. And before the end of
that year, (viz. in the month of April,) the solemnity of the Feast of
Easter being finished, took[273] to wife Isabell, Countess of
Gloucester, widow of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, and sister
to William Mareschal, then Earl of Pembroke; likewise the same year he
obtained a grant[274] of the manor, castle, and honour of Knaresburgh,
in com. Ebor. to himself and the issue of his body by the same
Isabell, to hold by the service of two knights’ fees.

Nor was he less eminent for his military knowledge than for those his
great advancements in riches and honour; for in 20 Henry III.
ambassadors from the Emperor came[275] to the king to desire that he
might be sent to make war on his behalf against the French; but the
king (though then married) having no child, answered,[275] that it
could not stand with reason or safety that a person so young, and
especially at that time being the heir apparent to the crown, should
be employed on such an hazardous adventure, offering them the choice
of any other. Nevertheless, before[276] the end of that year, this
earl (with Gilbert Marshal, then Earl of Pembroke, and divers other
great men) took[276] upon him the cross for a journey to the Holy
Land; and for the better furnishing himself with money, sold many of
his woods; but notwithstanding this resolution, he went not at that
time, for the next year following, (viz. 21 Hen. III.) the king being
seduced by the advice of aliens, and having wasted his treasure,
required[277] a great supply from his subjects, which being granted
and put into the hands of aliens to be transported, occasioned[278]
high discontents; this earl, therefore, dealt freely with him, and
represented to him the danger thereof; and though he found that what
he then said availed little, ceased not the next year following to
continue[278] his good advice, and in particular to tell him how ill
he had done in permitting Simon de Montfort to marry the Countess of
Pembroke his sister; which free and plain dealing with the king did
not at all alienate his affections from him, for shortly after, viz.
in 23 Hen. III. he obtained a grant[279] of the Castle of Lidford and
Forest of Dertmore in fee; before the end of which year, meeting[280]
with divers of the nobility at Northampton, they did there by oath
oblige[280] themselves to go forthwith into the Holy Land for the
service of God and the church.

Taking his leave therefore (soon after) of the bishops and divers
others of the nobles at Reading, (there met by the appointment of the
Pope’s Legate,) many of them wept,[281] in regard he was a person
wholly minding the public welfare; whereupon, he told[282] them, that
had he not made his vow, he would go rather than stay to see the
approaching miseries fall upon this realm; and having prepared[283]
all things ready for his journey, came[283] to the Abbey of St.
Alban’s, where, in full chapter, he desired[283] the prayers of that
whole convent for his good success, then went[283] to London, and took
his leave[283] of the king, the legate, and nobles, and so hasted to
Dovor; whence, soon after arriving in France, he was nobly
received[284] by the king of that realm, and his mother, who sent[284]
the marshall to conduct him through that country, and to entertain him
in all places honourably thence to Avinion, where he had also free and
great entertainment; then to[285] Vienna, whence he intended to take
shipping for Arles; and being in those parts, was met by[286] the Earl
of Provence, (whose daughter King Henry had married,) and so hasted
to[286] the city of St. Giles, there to do his devotions, and receive
the benediction of the monks of that place, which done he gave them
twenty marks; but before he went thence, there came[287] to him a
legate from the Pope (with the Archbishop of Arles) to inhibite[287]
him from proceeding further on his journey, which he took so ill
(being fully resolved thereon, and fitted accordingly), that he
refused[288] both to obey their authority, and to hearken to their
dissuasions. Seeing, therefore, all their endeavours in vain, they
would have persuaded him to take shipping at the port called the
Deadwater, but that he liked not, and so entered[289] the
Mediterranean at Marseilles.

In anno 1241, (25 Hen. III.) being come into the Holy Land, he
accepted of a truce with the Souldan of Babylon, upon condition[290]
that the French who were prisoners there might be released, and that
Jerusalem, with all the parts adjacent, should be free from any
molestation, as also upon divers other articles honourable to the
Christians. And the next year following, viz. 26 Hen. III. returned;
the king, therefore, having intelligence thereof, with the queen,
met[291] him at Dovor.

Soon after which, a Parliament being held at Westminster, where all
the nobles were met, this earl was sent[292] to them by the king (with
the provost of Beverley) to desire their advice for the recovery of
his inheritance in Normandy and other parts of France. But finding
that the king did not incline to follow the counsel of those who
sought the general honour and good of himself and the realm, after
some sharp dispute with him thereon, he associated himself with the
Earls Marshal, Hereford, and some others, and took[293] shipping for
France.

Before this time, it was, saith[294] my author, that the king, by the
advice of his nobles, having given him the whole province of
Gascoigne, he went thither, and showing his charter received the
homages of that people, and after some years by another charter had a
confirmation of that grant; but afterwards, when the queen was
delivered of a son, that she so far prevailed with the king as he
should reassume his grant, and give it to the prince, and that
thereupon, this earl grew much displeased, insisting still upon his
right, though he had thus lost the possession. Moreover, that the king
being then in Gascoigne, and finding the people wavering in their
obedience, not well knowing which way to lean, he did in great wrath
require this earl to resign his grant, and to quit his whole right
thereto. Also, that finding him refractory, he gave command that the
men of Bordeaux should seize upon him by night and imprison him, which
they refused to do, partly in respect of his birth, and partly by
reason they had done homage to him. And, furthermore, seeing he could
not prevail with them that way, he corrupted some with gifts to effect
his desires, viz. to lay hands on him as a rebel, and cast him in
prison; also, that having advertisement thereof (then lodging in the
monastery of S. Cross at Bourdeaux) he got privily on shipboard to
come for England, but without provisions or any necessaries for the
journey; and lastly, (to add to his affliction,) that he was so tossed
with a fearful tempest, as that being in no little peril of shipwreck,
he made a vow to found an abbey for monks of the Cistercian order, in
case he should safe arrive in England.

The next thing memorable of him is, that having taken another journey
to the Holy Land (with William Longespe, Earl of Salisbury), he
returned[295] thence, in anno 1422, (26 Hen. III.) and accompanied[295]
the king into Gascoigne, in aid of Hugh le Brun, Earl of March (who
had married the king’s mother), and was[295] with him in that battle
near Xant against the King of France; after which, the next ensuing
year, he married[296] Senchia, daughter of Reymund Earl of Provence,
sister to the Queen, the wedding being kept at Westminster with great
pomp, whom he endowed[297] at the church door with the third part of
all his lands, whereof he then stood possessed, or should afterwards
acquire, the castle and manor of Berkhampstead being part; and shortly
after, keeping his Christmas[298] at Walingford, entertained the[298]
king and most of the nobility there with extraordinary feasting.

In 30 Hen. III. the templars and hospitalers electing[299] many
secular persons into their societies for succour of the Holy Land, and
defence of those castles then besieged there, this earl sent[299] them
a thousand pounds towards that good work. And the same year, in
accomplishment[300] of his vow formerly made, founded[300] a
Cistercian abbey at Hales (near Winchcombe, in com. Gloc.) causing
also the church of Beaulieu (which his father King John had founded)
to be then dedicated. Moreover, in anno 1247, (31 Hen. III.) by
authority[301] from the Pope, he gathered[301] vast sums of money from
those who were signed with the cross. And the next year following,
through importunity with the king, obtained[302] that no clipt money
should be current.

In anno 1250, (34 Henry III.) passing[303] through France with a
pompous retinue, viz.[303] forty knights, all in rich liveries, five
waggons, and fifty sumpter horses, (his lady and his son Henry being
also with him,) the pope being then at Lyons, sent[304] all his
cardinals, except one, besides a number of clerks, to meet him, and
conduct him thither, and there receiving him with great respect,
feasted[304] him at his own table. Being returned[304] from thence in
anno 1251, (35 Hen. III.) on the eve of St. Leonard, he caused the
Church of Hales to be dedicated[304] with great solemnity; which, with
extraordinary costs, he had so founded, as is before observed. And in
36 Hen. III. obtained a grant[305] of the Manor of Ocham in Rutland
(sometime belonging to Isabel de Mortimer), in part of payment of five
hundred pounds due to him from the king, upon the marriage of Senchia
his wife, to hold to himself and the heirs of his body by her.

Moreover, the next ensuing year, Albert, a clerk, coming[306] over
into England from the Pope, made offer to him of the kingdom of
Apulia, of which he refused[306] to accept, unless he might have some
cautionary places of strength, as also hostages, for securing his
possession. And in 38 Hen. III. the king then going into Gascoigne he
was joined[307] with the queen in the government here during his
absence, in which year he exacted vast sums of money from the Jews for
the king’s use.

It is observed,[308] that in anno 1255, (39 Hen. III.) upon a full
meeting of the nobles in Parliament at Westminster, the king specially
applied himself to this earl by a formal speech for a large supply of
money, viz. forty thousand pounds, the pope having also written
letters to him for that purpose, signifying that he should therein
give a good example to others; but herein he answered neither of their
expectations. And being a person of high repute for his heroic and
noble endowments, about two years after (in the parliament[309] held
at London on the Feast of the Nativity), certain nobles of Almaine
being arrived here, represented[309] to the whole baronage of England
then met, that by unanimous consent of the princes of the empire he
was elected King of the Romans, shewing letters testimonial for
further manifestation thereof; soon after which, the Archbishop of
Cologne, with divers others of the nobles of that country, came[310]
likewise hither, and did homage[310] to him; whereupon, he gave[310]
them five hundred marks towards their travelling expenses, as also a
rich mitre, adorned with precious stones; which so pleased the
archbishop, that he said[310] thus, as he hath put this mitre on my
head, I will put the crown of Almaine on his.

In order whereunto, taking leave[310] of his friends on the third day
in Easter week, he committed[310] himself to the prayers of the
religious, and began his journey towards Yarmouth, there to take
shipping, leaving the charge[311] of his castles and lands in England
to the Bishop of London, and arriving shortly at Aquisgrave, was there
crowned[312] king upon Ascension day.

Having thus received that great honour, he returned[313] thence the
next year after, and landed[313] at Dovor upon the day of S. Julian,
where the king met him with much joy. After this, during his stay
here, he made great preparation for his journey back to receive the
crown of the Empire, which the pope underhand endeavoured[314] to
obtain for him.

But that which I have next observed to be most memorable of him is,
that upon that grand rebellion of those haughty spirited barons, then
headed by Montfort Earl of Leicester and Clare Earl of Gloucester, he
then adhered stoutly[315] to the king; and in 48 Henry III. marched
with him to Northampton, where the chief strength of all their forces
at that time were met together, and that he assisted[315] him in the
siege and taking of that town, as also that, pursuing their dissipated
forces into Sussex, (where the Londoners, with all their power
recruited them,) he commanded[316] the body of the king’s army in that
fatal battle of Lewes, where he shared with him in the unhappy success
of that day, being there taken prisoner. Lastly, that (in anno 1267,
51 Hen. III.) he went[317] again into Germany, and there married[317]
Beatrix, niece to the Archbishop of Cologne. And in 55 Hen. III. was
made[318] Governor of Rockingham Castle, in com. Northampton, and
Warden of the Forest.

Having thus done with the chief of his secular actings and
employments, I now come to his works of piety.

Besides his foundation of the Abbey of Hales (whereof I have already
made mention) he likewise founded[319] that of Rewley (of the same
order) in the suburbs of Oxford; and moreover granted[320] to the
monks of Bec, in Normandy, that all their tenants within the precincts
of the honour of Walingford should be exempted from suit of court to
that honour, provided that his bailiff of Walingford should every year
keep a court leet for the manor of Okebourne within the bounds of the
priory there (which was a cell to Bec), to see that the king’s peace
should be duly kept, and that the benefit arising by that leet should
redound to those monks of Okebourne, they entertaining the bailiff of
Walingford with three or four horse of his retinue at their charge for
that day.

Furthermore, he gave[321] to the canons of the Holy Trinity at
Knaresburgh, for the health of his soul and the souls of his
ancestors, the chapel of S. Robert at Knaresburgh, with the advowson
of the church at Hamstwait, confirming all those grants which King
John had given thereto, with divers other lands of great extent. And
to the monks of St. Michael’s Mount in Cornwall, gave[322] ten
shillings rent due to him for St. James Fair, kept yearly near to the
Mount.

Having thus acted a long part on the theatre of this world with great
honour, after a tedious sickness[323] at his manor of Berkhampstead,
in com. Herts, he died[324] upon the fourth of the nones of April,
anno 1172 (56 Hen. III.) whereupon his heart was buried[325] in the
Gray Friars at Oxford, under a sumptuous pyramid, and his body[325] in
the Abbey of Hales, so founded by him as before hath been observed.

By his first wife Roese de Dovor, he had no issue, she taking another
husband, as it seems, when she arrived to years of consent.

By Isabel the second (widow of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester),
he had issue four sons, viz. John,[326] Henry,[326] Richard, and
Nicholas,[327] (of which Henry I shall say more by and by), John and
Richard departing this life in their infancy, and Nicholas, with his
mother, in[328] childbed. Also a daughter, who dying[329] in her
cradle, was buried[329] near unto John her brother at Reading.

By Senchia, the third wife (daughter to Raymund Earl of Provence), he
had issue Richard, who died[329] young, and Edmund,[329] who succeeded
him in his Earldom of Cornwall; but by Beatrix,[330] the fourth wife,
(niece to the Archbishop of Cologne,) he had no issue.

It is said[331] that he had an illegitimate daughter called Isabel,
who became the wife[331] of Maurice Lord Berkeley, and to whom King
Henry the Third (calling her his niece), for her better support, in
the forty-eighth of his reign, gave the manors of Herotesham and
Trotesclive in Kent.[332] There is also this epitaph recorded[333] for
him.

  Hic jacet in tumulo Richardus Teutonicorum
  Rex vivens, propria contentus sorte bonorum.
  Anglorum Regis germanus, Pictaviensis
  Ante Comes dictus, sed tandem Cornubiensis.
  Demum Theutonicis tribuens amplissima dona
  Insignitus erat, Caroli rutilante corona.
  Hinc Aquilam gessit clypeo, sprevitque Leonem.
  Regibus omnigenis precellens per rationem.
  Dives opum mundi, sapiens, conviva, modestus;
  Alloquio, gestu, dum vixit semper honestus.
  Jam regnum regno commutans pro meliore,
  Regi cælorum summo conregnet honore.

Of his two sons, I shall first speak of Henry.

This HENRY, in anno 1257 (41 Henry III.) was[334] knighted by Richard
King of Almaine, his father, upon the day of his coronation at
Aquisgrave in Germany.

It is said that in 47 Hen. III. having been through plausible and
specious pretences seduced by Montfort Earl of Leicester, and some
other of the rebellious barons, he was taken off by Prince Edward for
the honour of Tikhill, which he then gave[335] him; and the same year
received[336] one hundred marks, assigned to him out of the issues of
the county of Dorset, by the king’s appointment, to fortify the
castles of Corff and Shireborne. But notwithstanding this, it seems
that he inclined to them again for the next year following, (viz. 48
Hen. III.) upon the march of Montfort and his party into the counties
of Gloucester, Worcester, Salop, and then southwards. This Henry
favouring them, was taken by some of the king’s soldiers. Howbeit,
shortly after, the king holding a Parliament at London, amongst those
who fell off from that rebellious pack he was[338] one, and
thenceforth stuck stoutly to the king, marching[339] with him to
Northampton, where the chief of their strength being then got
together, after a sharp dispute were vanquished.[339]

Moreover, in the battle of Lewes, he was[340] one of the principal
commanders in the body of the king’s army, at that time led by Richard
King of Almaine his father; and after that fatal overthrow there
(through the assistance of the Londoners, who poured out all the
strength they could make to their aid), seeing the king and divers of
the nobles made prisoners,[340] he joined with Prince Edward in
mediating a fair reconciliation betwixt both parties; and, in order
thereto, the next day following put himself into the hands of
Montfort, and the rest.

But after this I have not observed anything else further memorable of
him, other than that in 56 Henry III. being[340] with Prince Edward on
his way towards the Holy Land, and partly weary[340] of the length of
the journey, and partly desirous[340] to see his father before he
died, having leave[340] he came[340] into Italy, and at Viterbium
was[340] basely murdered by Guy one of the sons to Montfort, Earl of
Leicester, within the church of S. Laurence, at high mass, in revenge
of his father’s death, who had been slain in the battle of Evesham,
about seven years before, as I have elsewhere fully manifested.

I now come to EDMUND, who, surviving his father, succeeded him in the
dignity of Earl.


EDMUND EARL OF CORNWALL.

In 42 Henry III. this Edmund being possessed of the honour of Eye,
(his father then living,) upon levying the scutage of Wales, paid one
hundred and eighty pounds for ninety knights’ fees and an half
belonging thereto.[341] And in anno 1266, (51 Hen. III.) obtained[342]
of a certain nobleman, lord of Seyland, a large proportion of the
blood of Christ, which he deposited in the abbey of Hales (so founded
by his father as aforesaid.)

Furthermore, in 55 Hen. III. accomplishing[343] his full age of
twenty-one years, he received[344] the honour of knighthood, upon St.
Edward’s Day, and soon after that was invested with the title of Earl
of this county by cincture with the sword; before the end of which
year he likewise married[344] Margaret the sister of Gilbert de Clare,
Earl of Gloucester, and shortly after had livery of the castles of
Knaresburgh, Walingford, Okham, and Berkhamstead, of his
inheritance.[345]

Moreover, in 13 Edw. I. he obtained a charter[346] for a weekly market
every Friday at his manor of Cosham in com. Wilts; and the same year
had another[347] for free warren in his lordship of Great Cestreton,
and Little Cestreton, in com. Oxon, as also for free chase[348] in his
lands of Wasseley and Wymbureholt.

In 15 Edw. I. he had a grant of[349] the castle of Ockham, to hold in
fee with the sheriffalty of the county of Rutland. And in 16 Edw. I.
being made warden of England during the king’s absence (in the wars of
Scotland), marched into Wales, and laid siege to Droselan Castle, the
walls whereof he demolished.[350] Furthermore, in 17 Edw. I. he was
constituted sheriff[351] for the county of Cornwall in fee. And in 25
Edw. I. obtained the king’s precept[352] to the barons of his
Exchequer, that they should not exact more from him for the honour and
castle of Walingford, then the service of three knights’ fees, by
which it had been granted[353] to his father and his heirs in 15
Hen. III.

This Edmund founded[354] a certain college at Asherugge, in co. Bucks,
in honour of the blood of our Saviour, for certain brethren called
Bonhomes; and for the soul of Richard King of Almaine his father,
gave[355] to the monks of Rewley, in the suburbs of Oxford (being
fifteen in number), all his lands in North Osney, as also his manor of
Erdington and mills at Karsington, in that county; likewise one acre
of land in Bel juxta Roslin, with the advowson of the church of
Wendrove, in the hundred of Kerier, in com. Cornub.; also all his
woods at Nettlebed, and divers houses in London, situate in the parish
of St. Thomas the Apostle, with certain lands in Wylauston, and sixty
shillings yearly rent, payable by the monks of Thame, out of the manor
of Stoke Talmach; and departed[356] this life ――――. 28 Edw. I. being then
seised[356] of the honours of Eye, St. Waleries, and Wallingford, as
also of the castle and honour of Knaresburgh, likewise of the manor of
Launceton, of the castle and town of Restormell, of the borough of
Lostwithiel and castle of Tintagell, with the borough, in com.
Cornub., also of the castle and borough of Trematon, with the borough
of Ashe and manor of Calistoke, in the same county; of the manor of
Fordington in com. Dorset; Mere, with the castle; Corsham, Wilton, and
Claiton, in com. Wilts; Little Weldon in com. Northampton; of the
castle of Ocham, with the manors of Egelton and Langholme, in com.
Rutl., and likewise of the whole county of Rutland. Moreover, he died
seised of the city of Chichester, in com. Sussex; of the castle of
Berkhamstead in com. Hertf.; and of the manors of Bensington and
Watlington, with the four hundreds, viz. the hundred and half of
Chitren, the hundreds of Piriton, Lewkenore, Benfield, and Ewelme,
likewise of the half hundred of Swabby, the castle and honour of
Walingford, and manor of Henley, in com. Oxon.

Upon this, his death, which happened[357] at Asherugge on the calends
of October, anno 1300 (28 Edw. I.) without[357] issue, the king, by
his letters to the Bishop of Hereford, signified that he resolved to
have him buried in the Abbey at Hales upon Thursday after Palm Sunday
next ensuing; and, therefore, for the more honourable solemnity of his
funeral, purposing to be there himself, desired that bishop to meet
him and give his assistance in the celebration thereof. The like
letters he wrote to the Bishops of Worcester and Exeter, as also to
the abbots of Evesham, Tewkesbury, Winchcomb, Pershore, Eynesham,
Cirencester, Osney, Stanley in com. Wilts, Bordesley, Rewley near
Oxford, Gloucester, and to the prior of Worcester;[358] but the King’s
mind altering, he was interred at Asherugge.[359] At the solemnizing
of this great funeral, there was[360] likewise Prince Edward, with the
Bishops of Durham and Chester, as also the Earl of Warwick, and divers
others of the nobility.

After which, viz. the next ensuing year, I find that, through the
mediation[361] of the peers in the Parliament then held at Lincoln,
the king was pleased to allow[361] unto Margaret his widow five
hundred pounds per annum for her support; and that for the making good
thereof these lordships, lands, and rents were assigned,[362] viz. the
castle and manor of Ocham in com. Rotel. with the hundreds of
Martinesely, Alnestow, and East Hundred; the hamlet of Egilton (part
of the manor of Langham); in the same county; also fourteen pounds
sixteen shillings and fourpence yearly rent, issuing out of the Court
Leets and Sheriffs’ Aid in Keten, Preston, Okeham, Hameldon, and
divers other towns in that county; the manor of Baketon in com.
Norfolk; the manor of Haghleigh in com. Suffolk; the castle and manor
of Eye; the hamlets of Dalingho, Alderton, and Thorndon, in the same
county; the manor of Kirketon, with the towns, hamlets, and hundreds
of Kirketon, Haselhou, Coringham, and Maule, with the issues of the
sokemote of those manors, all in com. Linc.; the manor of Harewell in
com. Berks; the manor of Isleworth, with the hamlets of Heston,
Twickenham, and Wicton, in com. Middlesex; twenty-one pounds yearly
rent out of Queenhithe, in the city of London; the town of Rockingham,
and manor of Little Weldon, in com. Northampton; the manor of Glatton,
with the hamlet of Holme, in com. Huntingdon; the manor of Fordington,
with the hamlet of Whitwell, in com. Dorset; twenty pounds yearly rent
of the ferme of the town of Malmsbury in com. Wilts; twenty pounds,
fifteen shillings, and sixpence yearly rent of the ferme of the
borough of Ivelcester, in com. Somerset; ten pounds, seventeen
shillings, and sevenpence yearly rent, out of Old Shoreham, in com.
Sussex; the manor of Cippeham, and hamlet of Stor, in com. Bucks, with
the manor and town of Henley in com. Oxon.


JOHN OF ELTHAM, EARL OF CORNWALL. (2 EDW. III.)

This John being second son to King Edward the Second, was born[363] at
Eltham in Kent, upon the festival of the Blessed Virgin’s Assumption,
in anno 1316, the 9th of his father’s reign; and in 16 Edward II. had
a grant[364] in fee of the castle, manor, and honour of Tuttebury,
part of the possessions of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, then attainted.
Also in 1 Edw. III. another[365] in general tail of the manor of
Milham in com. Norfolk; and a third[366] in reversion after the death
of John de Britannia, Earl of Richmond, to himself and the heirs male
of his body, of the honour of Richmond, with all the castles, manors,
and lands belonging thereto; shortly after which, viz. in 2 Edw. III.
he was advanced[367] to the title of Earl of Cornwall in that
parliament which begun at Salisbury after the quindesme of St.
Michael. And in 3 Edw. III. the king, then going[368] into France to
do his homage for the dukedom of Aquitaine, was constituted[369] his
lieutenant here during his absence. In 4 Edw. III. he had another
grant[370] in tail general of twenty pounds per annum, by the title of
Earl of Cornwall, to be paid out of the issues of that county;
likewise of the manor of Hanlegh, and of the castle and manor of Eye,
with the hamlets of Dalingho, Alderton, Thorndon, and certain lands in
Clopton, in com. Suffolk; also of twenty pounds yearly rent, payable
by the Prior of Bromholme, in com. Norfolk, for the manor of Baketone;
of certain rents pertaining to the honour of Eye in com. Norfolk,
Suff. and Essex; of the guardianship of the castle of Eye, and of the
free court in Lincoln belonging thereto; of the castle, town, and
honour of Berkhamstead in com. Hertford; of the manor of Risberghe,
with the park and manor of Cippenham, in com. Bucks; of the castle,
town, and honour of Walingford in com. Berks, with its members; of the
honour of St. Walerie, in com. Oxon, and other counties; of the mills
at Oxford, with the meadow there called Kingsmede; of the manors of
Boudon and Haverbergh in com. Leicester; of the manor of Byflete in
com. Surrey; and of the town of Rokyngham in com. Northampton, all of
which were then valued[371] at two thousand per annum. Besides which,
he then also obtained a grant[371] of the hundreds of Hertsmere and
Stow in com. Suffolk, and of the yearly ferme of Queenhithe in the
city of London.

In 5 Edw. III. upon[372] the king’s expedition into Scotland, he was
again appointed[373] his lieutenant here during his absence. And in 7
Edw. III. had another grant[374] in tail general of the hundreds in
Cornwall; likewise of the town of Lestwithiel, with all the issues and
profits of that county, then belonging to the king, viz. of the ports,
wreck of sea, prizes, and customs, as also of the yearly ferme of the
city of Exeter, with the profits of the water of Sutton, in com.
Devon, and of the stannaries and coinage thereof in that county;
likewise of the river of Dertmouth, with the profits of the mines in
Cornwall, and of the town of Yvelchester in com. Somerset.

In 8 Edw. III. he obtained license[375] for to have a market every
week, upon the Thursday, at his manor of Wintringham in com. Lincoln,
as also for two fairs, one on the eve, day, and morrow of St. Philip
and St. James, and six days next ensuing; the other on the eve and day
of All Saints, and six days following; likewise for two fairs at
Kirketon, the same, one on the eve and day of the translation of St.
Thomas the Martyr, and six days after; the other on the eve and day of
St. Andrew the Apostle, and six days ensuing; and in 9 Edw. III.
was[376] in that expedition then made into Scotland; so likewise in 10
Edw. III. at which time the king having intelligence that the French
had promised to aid the Scots, he marched[377] himself into that realm
with a great army, and fortified the castle of Stryvelyn, with a great
ditch, as also the town of St. Johnston’s, at which place this John
Earl of Cornwall, then[378] also being and falling sick, departed[378]
this life without wife or issue, and was afterwards honourably buried
in St. Edmund’s chapel, within the abbey church of Westminster, where
his monument still remaineth.

       *     *     *     *     *

  A list of those individuals who have held the Lands and the
    Patronage of the ancient Princes of Cornwall, with the Nominal
    Office of Duke, since the settlement made by King Edward the Third.

  1. EDWARD PLANTAGENET, the Black Prince, created by Charter,
     confirmed in Parliament, A. D. 1337, with this clause:

Habend. et tenend. eidem Duci et ipsius ac heredum suor. Regum Angl.
_Filiis primogenitis_, et Ducib. dicti loci in Regno Angl. hereditarie
successur.

Which has been thus translated:

To have and to hold to the same Duke, and to the first begotten sons
of him, and of his heirs, _Kings of England_, and to the Dukes of the
said place in the Kingdom of England, hereditarily to succeed. (See
Lord Dunstanville’s Edition of Carew, pp. 433-441.)

  2. RICHARD PLANTAGENET, afterwards King Richard the Second, in
     opposition, as it would seem, to the words of the grant, as his
     father had never been King of England.

  3. HENRY PLANTAGENET, son and heir of King Henry the Fourth,
     afterwards King Henry the Fifth.

  4. EDWARD PLANTAGENET, son and heir of King Henry the Sixth,
     murdered in 1471.

  5. EDWARD PLANTAGENET, son and heir of King Edward the Fourth,
     nominally King in 1483, but murdered the same year.

  6. EDWARD PLANTAGENET, son and heir of King Richard the Third.

  7. ARTHUR TUDOR, son and heir of King Henry the Seventh, died in his
     father’s lifetime.

  8. HENRY TUDOR, afterwards King Henry the Eighth.

  9. HENRY FREDERICK STUART, son and heir of King James the First,
     died in his father’s lifetime.

  10. CHARLES STUART, afterwards King Charles the First.

  11. CHARLES STUART, afterwards King Charles the Second.

  12. GEORGE AUGUSTUS, afterwards King George the Second.

  13. FREDERICK LEWIS, son of King George the Second, died in 1751, in
      his father’s lifetime.

  14. GEORGE WILLIAM FREDERICK, afterwards King George the Third.

  15. GEORGE AUGUSTUS FREDERICK, afterwards King George the Fourth.


     [182] Math. Westm.

     [183] Mat. Westm.

     [184] H. Knighton, col. 2320. n. 30.

     [185] Monast. Anglic. vol. i. p. 254 b.

     [186] Ibid. p. 254 a. n. 50.

     [187] Ibid. p. 258 and 259.

     [188] Monast. Anglic. vol. 2, p. 206 a.

     [189] Math. Westm. in anno 1013.

     [190] Matth. Westm. in anno 1016.

     [191] R. Hoveden, fol. 250 b. n. 20.

     [192] W. Gemet, p. 288 D. Ord. Vit. p. 660 B.

     [193] S. Dunelm. col. 214, n. 30. W. Gemet. p. 293 D.

     [194] Ord. Vit. p. 765 A.

     [195] Monast. Angl. vol. 1, p. 551 a. n. 60.

     [196] Monast. Angl. vol. 1, p. 551, a. n. 60.

     [197] Rob. de Monte.

     [198] Monast. Anglic. vol. 2, p. 982, n. 20 and 30.

     [199] Ibid. vol. 1, p. 213, a. lin. 35.

     [200] Mat. Paris, p. 54, n. 10 & 20.

     [201] Ord. Vit. p. 578 D.

     [202] Monast. Angl. vol. 2, p. 982, n. 30 & 40.

     [203] Chron. Norm. p. 995 C.

     [204] Domesd. lib.

     [205] W. Malms, fo. 88 b. n. 40.

     [206] Ibid. fol. 89 a.

     [207] S. Dunel. col. 229. W. Malms. fol. 89, n. 10. Mat.
     Paris, p. 60, 1. 14.

     [208] Ord. Vit. p. 819 D.

     [209] Jorval. col. 1002, n. 20.

     [210] In Vigil. S. Mich.

     [211] Ord. Vit. p. 821 A.

     [212] Ibid. B.

     [213] Ibid. page 822 A. Mat. Paris, p. 63, 1. 6, Jorv. col.
     8221, n. 12.

     [214] Ord. Vit. p. 811 A.

     [215] Monast. Anglic. v. 1, p. 668 a. n. 40.

     [216] Ibid. v. 2, p. 909.

     [217] Ibid. p. 954 b.

     [218] Ibid. v. 1, p. 668, n. 60.

     [219] W. Gemet. 306 D.

     [220] Vinc. Discov. p. 130.

     [221] Ord. Vit. 915 D.

     [222] W. Malmesb. 105 a. n. 30.

     [223] Gesta Regis Steph. 950 A.

     [224] Ibid. B.

     [225] Ibid. 956 A.

     [226] Ibid. 968 B. C.

     [227] Ibid. 969 A.

     [228] Rot. Pip. 2 H. 2. Somerset.

     [229] Testa de Nevill, Devon.

     [230] R. Hoveden, 282 b. n. 10.

     [231] Ibid. 283, n. 30.

     [232] Ibid. b. n. 40.

     [233] Liber Rub. in Scacc. tit. Cornub.

     [234] Rot. Pip. 14 H. 2. Cornub. Devon.

     [235] R. Hoved. 307 a.

     [236] Ibid. 6 n. 10.

     [237] Monast. Angl. vol. 1, 1002, n. 50.

     [238] R. Hoved. 313 a. n. 40.

     [239] Domitian A. VIII. in Bibl. Cotton. 79 a.

     [240] Vinc. Discov. p. 130.

     [241] Claus. 16 Joh. m. 21.

     [242] Ex vet. Cod. MS. penes Will. Mohun, eq. aur. anno 1583.

     [243] Joh. Tinemuth, MS. in Bibl. Bodl. lib. 19, cap. 104.
     Domitian A. VIII. in Bibl. Cotton. 922.

     [244] Rot. Norm. Liberat. 4 Joh. m. 1.

     [245] Rot. Pip. 4 Joh. Devon.

     [246] Pat. 17 Joh. m. 15.

     [247] Ibid.

     [248] Testa de Nevill, Devon.

     [249] Pat. 1 H. 3. m. 13.

     [250] Rot. Fin. 4 H. 3. M. 3.

     [251] Pat. 4 H. 3. p. 1, m. 6.

     [252] Pat. 4 H. 3. p. 1, m. 6.

     [253] Claus. 6 H. 3. m. 7.

     [254] Pat. 1 E. 4. p. 1, m. 5.

     [255] Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 1, m. 17.

     [256] Claus. 16 Joh. m. 23.

     [257] Claus. 16 Joh. m. 23.

     [258] Pat. 1 H. 3. m. 6.

     [259] Pat. 2 H. 3. m. 3.

     [260] Pat. 5 H. 3. p. 1, m. 6.

     [261] Pat. 9 H. 3. m. 7.

     [262] M. Paris, in ann. 1225, p. 323, n. 30.

     [263] Ibid. n. 40.

     [264] Ibid. n. 50.

     [265] Ypod. Neustr. in ann. 1226.

     [266] M. Paris, 324, and Ibid. n. 10.

     [267] Annal. S. Augustini Cant.

     [268] M. Paris, 337, n. 10.

     [269] Ibid. n. 30.

     [270] Ibid, n. 40.

     [271] Claus. 11 Hen. 3. m. 3.

     [272] Cart. 15 H. 3. p. 1, m. 4.

     [273] M. Paris, in an. 1231, p. 368, n. 20.

     [274] Cart. 19 H. 3. m. 19. Pat. 19 H. 3. m. 14.

     [275] M. Par. in An. 1230, p. 421, n. 50.

     [276] Ibid. 431, n. 30.

     [277] Ibid. 445, n. 30 and 40.

     [278] Ibid. 445, n. 30 and 40.

     [279] Cart. 23 H. 3. m. 1.

     [280] Ibid. 516, n. 40.

     [281] Ibid. in an. 1140, p. 526, n. 20.

     [282] Ibid. n. 30.

     [283] Ibid. n. 40.

     [284] Ibid. n. 50.

     [285] Ibid. 537.

     [286] Ibid. n. 10.

     [287] Ibid. n. 20.

     [288] Ibid. n. 20.

     [289] Ibid. n. 30.

     [290] M. Westm. in eodem An.

     [291] M. Paris, p. 579, n. 50.

     [292] Ibid. 581, n. 20.

     [293] Ibid. 595, n. 50.

     [294] Ibid. p. 837, n. 20.

     [295] M. Westm. in an. 1243.

     [296] Mat. Paris 606, n. 40.

     [297] Pat. 28 H. 3. m. 10.

     [298] Mat. Paris, in an. 1244, p. 613, n. 20.

     [299] M. West, in an. 1245.

     [300] Ibid. in an. 1246. Monast. Anglic. vol. 1, 928, n. 10.

     [301] Mat. Paris 734, n. 20.

     [302] Ibid. 749, n. 10 & 20.

     [303] Ibid. p. 773.

     [304] Ibid. 777, n. 30 and 40.

     [305] Claus. 36 H. 3. m. 16.

     [306] M. West, in eodem an. M. Paris.

     [307] M. Westm. in an. 1253.

     [308] Mat. Paris, p. 913, n. 40.

     [309] M. Westm. 239, n. 50.

     [310] Ibid. 947, n. 40.

     [311] Ibid. n. 55.

     [312] Ypod. Neustr. in an. 1257.

     [313] Mat. Paris, 983, n. 50.

     [314] M. Westm. in eodem an.

     [315] Mat. Paris, 984, n. 10. Ibid. 993, n. 50.

     [316] Ibid. 995, n. 40 and 50.

     [317] Ex Coll. R. Gl. S.

     [318] Rot. Fin. 55 H. 3. m. 2.

     [319] Mon. Angl. vol. 1, 934 a, n. 50.

     [320] Ibid. 583 b.

     [321] Mon. Angl. vol. 2, 834, n. 10.

     [322] Ibid. 901 b. n. 60.

     [323] Ex Coll. R. Gl. S.

     [324] Mat. Paris, 1007, n. 30.

     [325] Mon. Angl. vol. 1, 934 a. n. 60.

     [326] Ex Coll. R. Gl. S.

     [327] Mat. Paris, p. 523, n. 40.

     [328] Ex Coll. ut supra. Mat. Paris, ut supra.

     [329] Ex Coll. R. Gl. S.

     [330] Plac. de Banco T. Mich. 2 Edw. 1. rot. 67.

     [331] Vinc. Discov. p. 136.

     [332] Claus. 48 H. 3, m. 4.

     [333] Vinc. Discov. ut supra.

     [334] Mat. Paris, 956, n. 10.

     [336] Matt. Paris, 992, n. 20.

     [337] Claus. 47 H. 3. m. 5.

     [338] Matt. Paris, 992, n. 50, and 993.

     [339] Ibid. n. 50.

     [340] Ibid. 996, n. 10 and 20.

     [341] Rot. Pip. 42 H. 3. Norf.

     [342] Lel. Coll. vol. 1, 289.

     [343] Esc. 56 H. 3. n. 32.

     [344] Ex Coll. R. Gl. S. M.S. in Bibl. Bodl. [K. 84, Cant.]
     f. 65 b.

     [345] Rot. Fin. 56 H. 3. m. 14.

     [346] Cart. 13 E. 1. n. 39.

     [347] Pars altera, de eodem an. n. 1.

     [348] Ibid. n. 19.

     [349] Rot. Pip. 15 Ed. 1, and 19 Edw. 2. Roteland.

     [350] Thos. Wals. in an. 1288.

     [351] Rot. Pip. 17 Ed. 1. Cornub.

     [352] Claus. 25 Ed. 1. m. 10.

     [353] Claus. 25 Ed. 1. m. 10.

     [354] Lel. Coll. vol. 1, p. 78.

     [355] Mon. Anglic., vol. 1, 934 b. and 935 a. Mon. Angl. vol.
     2, 334 b. n. 10.

     [356] Esc. 28 E. 1. n. 44.

     [357] Ex Coll. R. Gl. S.

     [358] Claus. 29 Edw. I. in dorso m. 17.

     [359] Mon. Ang. vol. 2, 346 b.

     [360] E Coll. R. Gl. S. ut supra.

     [361] Th. Wals. in an. 1301.

     [362] Claus. 30 E. 1 m. 15.

     [363] T. Wals, p. 84, n. 20.

     [364] Cart. 16 E. 2. n. 34.

     [365] Cart. 1 Ed. 3. n. 25.

     [366] Pat. 1 Ed. 3. p. 3, m. 5.

     [367] T. Wals. p. 110. Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 7.

     [368] T. Wals. 112, n. 20.

     [369] Pat. 3 E. 3. p. 1, m. 16.

     [370] Cart. 4 E. 3. n. 12.

     [371] Cart. 4 E. 3. n. 18.

     [372] T. Wals. 114, n. 10.

     [373] Pat. 5 Ed. 3. p. 1, m. 16.

     [374] Cart. 7 Ed. 3. n. 7.

     [375] Cart. 8 Ed. 3. n. 44.

     [376] Rot. Scoc. 9 Ed. 3. m. 3.

     [377] Rot. Scoc. 10 Ed. 3. m. 16.

     [378] Pat. 10 Ed. 3. p. 2, m. 40.




APPENDIX.

XIII.

THE HUNDREDS OF CORNWALL.


PREFIXED to Tonkin’s MS. of the Parochial History of Cornwall (with
additions in notes by J. Whitaker) are the following notes:

Mem. Mr. Hawkins tells me that there is a camp near Trutheun, in
Bishop’s Wood, not large.

Carew (Edition 1769) fol. 30. The Cornish “pay in most places onely
_fee Morton_ releeses, which is after five markes the whole knight’s
fee (so called of John, Earle first of Morton, then of Cornwall, and
lastly King of this land); whereas, that of _fee Gloucester_ is five
pounds.”

The MS. is in the possession of the Rev. Mr. Pye, Rector of Truro, and
had been recovered by him from imminent destruction, as he told me, at
a house formerly belonging to Mr. Tonkin, and then inhabited by Mr.
Fortescue. A MS. in folio, and another in quarto, had been left in a
cupboard of the kitchen, and applied to culinary purposes. Mr. Pye’s
attention was arrested by seeing part of the quarto wrapping round
some plumb cake; he therefore begged the rest. And he found the Folio
had been used entirely, and the quarto up to the letter P. and page
406. With this account he made me (as I thought) a present of the MS.
I therefore wrote some additions of my own upon the blank places of
it. He afterwards desired me (as I thought) to lend it him awhile. But
when I sent for it back again, he denied he had ever meant to give it
me; and I thought myself obliged in honour to waive all claim to the
property, and to borrow it for transcription. But I then erased my
own remarks from the whole, and have here added many, very many
others.                                      October 26th 1790. J. W.


THE HUNDREDS OF CORNWALL.


LES-NEWITH. New Court. (Dr. Pryce).

I notice this first, because it points out the scope and drift of the
other names. It is so called from the Court of the Hundred, Les-Newydh
(C.) New Court, as being a new Hundred, and this new Court giving name
to the place at which it was kept, near Tintagel.


STRATTON.

So called from Stratton, the seat of its Court, and therefore the head
of the hundred. The hill full of fresh springs of waters (Dr. Pryce).


POWDRE.

So called from the Court House (I apprehend) called (I suppose) Pou
Dre (C.) the house of the province. Pou Dar, the borough, country, or
hundred of Oaks. (Dr. Pryce.)


PIDRE.

Called from its house near the four burrows, which has alwas given
name to the street in Truro, leading towards it, as the house was so
called from its being at the four burrows, Pidyr Carnon perhaps. The
fourth hundred. (Dr. Pryce.)


TRIG.

From its house called Trig (C.) a dwelling, and situate at the ebb of
the sea, or on the sea shore. (Dr. Pryce.)


EAST AND WEST.

Hundreds, formed by the English since the Conquest of Cornwall, and so
named by them from the relative situation of their respective Court
Houses.


KERRIER.

From Curhar (C.) I believe a jail, a prison; the Court House of the
Hundred, I apprehend, having always a prison a jail for it.

The coast or border of the country, Kur-Urian (Dr. Pryce); which
signify, even in Dr. Pryce himself, Kur, the coast or border of a
country, and, Urian, the border, boundary, or limit of a country: so
that Kerrier, thus explained, is the same thing doubly.


PENWITH.

The head of the breach or separation, as the Land’s End is from
Scilly. (Dr. Pryce.)

From its Court House, on the promontory, called Penwith or Land’s End;
and this promontory, so called as Dr. Pryce thinks from Pen, and With
the head of the separation from Scilly; but rather as With (says
Nennius) signifies Divortium, and means the Isle of Wight, the
headland of the Isle opposite, just as this very promontory was called
by the ancients Anti Vesteeum, the point opposed to Vesteeum.




APPENDIX.

XIV.

EPITAPH OF RICHARD CAREW, OF ANTONY, ESQ.


The circumstances under which it has happened that no correct copy has
hitherto been printed of the epitaph of Carew, in the church of
Antony, are remarkable. The learned Camden was solicited to supply it
originally, as is shown by his Epistolæ, p. 106; but Richard Carew,
Esq. the son of the deceased, appears to have preferred a more
circumstantial composition, at the same time that he retained several
of Camden’s expressions. Hugh C――――, Esq. who wrote the Life of the
Historian prefixed to the Survey of Cornwall, quoted the epitaph, not
from the monument, but from Camden’s Epistolæ; and he was followed by
Mr. Polwhele and Mr. Lysons, under the impression that it was the
actual inscription on the tomb, nor was the deficiency supplied in the
handsome reprint of Carew’s Survey by Lord de Dunstanville. It is
believed that Mr. C. S. Gilbert was the first to copy it, but very
inaccurately, in his Historical Survey of Cornwall, ii, 388; and the
first perfect copy is the present.


  “FUI, NON SUM ―――― NON FUISTIS, ESTIS, ERITIS.

  RICARDO CAREW de Antony Armigero;
  Thomæ Carew, ex Elizabetha Edgecombe, Filio;
  Wimondi Carew, Mil: Bain: ex Martha Denni, Nepoti.
  Johannis Carew, ex Thomasina, Pronepoti;
  Alexandri Carew, ex Joanna Hatch, Abnepoti;
  Nato An: Sal: 1555
  Pacis Præsul: 1581
  Cornub: Vicecom: 1586
  In re milit: Regias Vices functo 1586
  In Colleg: Antiquariorum elect: 1598
  Religioso, Ingenioso Viro, Docto, Eloquenti,
  Liberali, Magnanimo, Integerrimo,
  Græce, Italice, Germanice, Gallice, Hispanice
  ΑΥΤΟΔΙΔΑΚΤΩ
  Injuriarum beneficiis placidis retaliatori,
  In libris versato, necnon librorum auctori candidissimo,
  de Principe et Patria
  ob assidua et fidelia officia, semper opt: merito,
  eruditorum, pauperum, oppressorum
  sublevatori benignissimo,
  qui, post 65 annorum bene et feliciter emensum spatium,
  inter privatas solitas diurnas ad D: OP: MAX:
  supplicationes in Bibliotheca
  placidè in Christo obdormivit 6^o. Nov: 1620.
  Richardus Carew Filius, Patri
  opt. merito, officiosi obsequii ergo
  cum lachrimis posuit.
  Uxorem duxit Julianam Arundell de Trerice 1577
  Johannem primogenitum, Anton: et Filias Gertrudam,
  Annam, et Annam ad superos premisit.
  Filios Richard: Johann: Hobbin:
  Georg: Wimond: reliquit superstites.

“The verses following were written by Richard Carew, of Antony, esq.
immediately before his death (which happened the sixth of November
1620) as he was at his private prayers in his study (his daily
practice) at four in the afternoon; and being found in his pocket,
were preserved by his grandson Sir Alexander Carew, according to whose
desire they are here set up in memory of him.

  Full thirteen fives of years I toyling have o’erpast
    And in the fourteenth, weary entered am at last.
  While rocks, sands, stormes, and leaks, to take my bark away
    By grief, troubles, sorrows, sickness did essay,
  And yet arriv’d I am not at the port of death,
    The port to everlasting life that openeth.
  My time uncertain, Lord! long certain cannot be,
    That best to mee’s unknown, and only known to thee.
  O! by repentance and amendment, grant that I
    May still live in thy fear――and in thy favour dye.”




INDEX

TO

CAREW’S SURVEY OF CORNWALL.


  Achym, arms of, 132
  Adams, Richard; has twins at an interval of ten weeks, 101
  Adelred, K. of Wessex, 96
  Admiral-Vice, of the Cornish Coast, 87
  Alan, King of Bretagne, 96
  Albo Monasterio, Ralph, (temp. Edw. 2), 50
  Alneto, John de, (temp. Edw. 2), 51
  Anglicus, Roger, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Antiquaries, College of, xviii
  Antony, East 102. Seat of the Carews, ix. The author buried there, xxiv
  Apport, John, 97
  Archdeaconry of Cornwall, 81
  Arscot, of Norton, arms of, 118. Mr. Tristram, 118-88
  Arthur, King, 61
  Arundell, ancient family of, 64. A Cornish rebel, 98. John, Bishop
     of Exeter, 59 John de, 52. Sir John, 118. Ralph de, 52. Sir
     Thomas, 61. Of Clifton, Pedigree, 113. Of Lanhearne, Pedigree and
     arms, 144. Of Talverne, Pedigree, 142. Sir John, 142. John, 142.
     Thomas, 88. Of Trerice, Pedigree, 145. Sir John, 62, 146, 147.
     John 83, 88, 146, 147
  Ashtorre, 113
  Assembly, places of, for the county, 86
  Athelstan, King of England, 96-159
  Atwel, a Divine and Physician, 60
  Audley, James Touchet, Lord, 98

  Bailiffs, 86
  Banquetting House, 107
  Barons of Cornwall; names of some barons and other notables of
    Cornwall in the reigns of Richard 1, Henry 3, Edward 2, 49
  Barret, ancient family of, 64, 127
  Basset, ancient family of, 64. Of Tehidy, arms of, 154. William,
    (temp. Edw. 2), 51
  Beacons, 85
  Beasts, for venery, 22. For meat, 23. For use, 24
  Beauchamp, ancient family of, 64
  Becket, arms of, 117
  Bedford, John Duke of, 146
  Beggar’s Island, 107
  Bellet, ancient family of, 64
  Bellocampo, Stephen de, (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Belloprato, Ralph, (temp. Ed. 2), 51. Stephen, 52
  Belowdy, 143
  Bendyn, Robert, (temp. Ed. 2), 51
  Bevill, ancient family of, 64. Reginald de, 52. Of Killigarth,
    Pedigree and arms, 131. Sir William, 83. His strange servant John
    Size, 130. Of Gwarnack, 140
  Bishops, 80
  Blackdon, Leonard, 83
  Blederick, Prince, 96
  Bligh, arms of, 117
  Bloyen, Ralph de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51
  Bloyhon, Ralph, 52
  Bluet, ancient family of, 64
  Blundus, Alan, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Bodmyn, 123. Free school, 124
  Bodrugan, 141. Otto de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51
  Body, Mr., 98
  Bonaventura, Thomasine, her school at St. Mary Wike, 119
  Bond, of Earth, pedigree and arms, 111
  Bone, Edward, the deaf and dumb servant of Mr. Peter Courtney, 140
  Bonithon, of Carclew, pedigree and arms, 150
  Bonville, Lord, 63
  Boroughs, Sir John, 99
  Boteraus, William, senior, 52. William, junior, 52
  Boterell, William, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Botreaux, Barons, 63. Castle, 120. Reginald de, (temp. Ed. 2), 50,
    52. William de, (temp. Ed. 2), 50
  Boussening, a remedy for insanity, 123
  Bray, ancient family of, 64. Lord, 63. John, 62
  Bret, William de, 52
  Bridges in Cornwall, 53
  Brooke, Lord, 63
  Brunn, Robert le, 52
  Buckingham, Duke of, 97
  Bude, Bay of, 118
  Buildings in Cornwall, 53
  Buller, of Tregarrick, pedigree of, 131. Arms of, 132. Shillingham,
    house of Mr., 111

  Calveley, Sir Hugh, 135
  Camden, Mr. mentions Mr. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, with
    approbation, in the 1st edition of his Britannia, xvii. A member
    of the Society of Antiquaries, xviii. His Epitaph on the Author,
    xxv
  Camel River, the Site of King Arthur’s last battle, 122
  Camelford, 122
  Campo Arnulphi, Henry de, (temp. Ed. 2), 50. Rich. de, (temp. Ed.
    2), 50. William de, 52. _See Champernowne_
  Cardin, Robert de, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Careticus, King of the Britons, 96
  Carew, alias Karrow, ancient family of, 64. Pedigree of, 102. Arms
    of, 104
  Carew, Richard, Esq. the author, his life, ix. &c. Went to Oxford,
    x. Disputes there with Sir Philip Sidney, x. Removed to the Middle
    Temple, xi. Not employed in Foreign Embassies, xii. His writings
    upon the Latin and English languages, and translations from the
    Spanish, xvi. Breeds bees, xvi. Writes a description of Cornwall,
    xvii. Justice of the Peace in 1581, xvii. Sheriff of Cornwall in
    1586, xvii. Deupty Lieut. of Cornwall, and Colonel of a Regiment
    of Militia in 1599, xviii. Member of the College of Antiquaries in
    1589, xviii. His oration on his introduction, xviii. Publishes his
    survey of Cornwall in 1602, xx. Its dedication to Sir Walter
    Raleigh, xx. His kinsman, xxi. A letter from him to Mr. Camden,
    xxii. Intended, but never published, a 2d edition of his Survey of
    Cornwall, xxiii. Intimate with Sir Henry Spelman, xxiv. Extolled
    by him and by John Dunbar a Scottish Poet, xxiv. His death, xxiv.
    Buried at East Antonie, xxiv. His monument there, and epitaph by
    Mr. Camden, xxvi. [See p. 378.] His office in Cornwall, 83-88
  Carew, Sir George, ambassador to the King of Poland, xi-xiii. To the
    King of Sweden, xii. A master in Chancery, and Secretary to the Lord
    Chancellor, xiii
  Carew, Dr. (the same Sir George), 59, 61
  Carew, Thomas, father of the author, ix
  Cargreen, 113
  Carmineu, Robert de, (temp. Henry 3), 50
  Carminou, John de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51. Oliver de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51.
    Roger de, 52
  Carmynow of Fentengollan, 142
  Carnsew of Bokelly, family and arms, 127. William, 83
  Carybullock, 115
  Castellan Dinas, 143
  Causand bay, 98
  Cavel family, 127
  Cavendish, Mr., 115
  Cerdic, King of Wessex, 96
  Cereseaux, Richard de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51, 52
  Chamond, of Launcels, pedigree and arms, 118
  Chamons, D., 88
  Champernowne, John, obtains the Priory of St. German from King Henry
    8, 109. See Campo Arnulphi.
  Chandos, Lord, 114
  Chaumont, ancient family of, 64
  Cheesewring, 129
  Cheyndut, Ralph de, 52
  Chiverton, arms of, 117. Thomas, 88
  Chiwarton of Chiwarton, arms of, 159
  Chough, Cornish, 36
  Church-ale, 68
  Civilians of Cornwall, 59
  Clerk of the market, 87
  Clifford, Sir Nicholas, 157
  Clyes, Rawe, a blacksmith and quack, 60
  Code, arms of, 132
  Cola, Roger, 52
  Colan, Little, 144
  Colleges, 81
  Condi, death of Louis Prince of, 125
  Constables, 85
  Copper, found in Cornwall, 6
  Corington of Newton, arms of, 117
  Corn, dressing the ground, breaking, sanding, 19. Crops, kind of
    grain, 20
  Cornish, Agnes, her wonderful preservation from drowning, 107
  Cornish chough, 36
  Cornubia, Walter de, 52
  Cornwall, Mr. Carew’s Survey of, published 1602, xx. An account of,
    by Sir John Doddridge, xxii. Map of, by Mr. Norden, xxiii. Name of
    the shire, shape, 1. Climate, length and breadth, boundaries, 2.
    Conveniences of site, 3. Its inconveniences, 4. Temperature, soil,
    its form and quality, 5. Hills, 6. Minerals, 6, &c. _See
    Minerals_, metals 6, &c. Tin mines 7, &c. _See Tin._ Mats,
    manufactured, 19. Corn, 19, &c. _see Corn_ Fruits, 20. Fuel,
    woods, timber, worms, snakestones, 21. Rats, mice, foxes, others,
    fallowdeer, 22. Parks, red-deer, sheep, cattle, 23. Horses, mules,
    birds, 24. Waters, _see Waters_. Islands, havens, 26. Sand, ore
    wood, shells, and nuts, shipping, wreck, 27. Salmon, trout, and
    peal, 28. Haven, fish 29, &c. _see Fish_. Oysters, 30. Fish on the
    coast, 31, &c. _see Fish_. Sea-fowl, 35. Cornish chough, 36.
    Inhabitants, 36. Tenements, 36, &c. _see Tenements_. Members sent
    to Parliament, 90. History and Topography, 96
  Cornwall, Dukes of 76, &c. 79. Coffin of a Duke of, found at
    Trematon, 110. Earls of, 78. Richard Earl of, 122
  Cornwall, John of, 58. Michael of, 58. Godfrey of, 59
  Cornwall, John, 97
  Coroners, 87
  Corporations, 86
  Cosowarth of Cosowarth, pedigree of, 144. Arms of, 145. John, 145.
    Edward, 145
  Cotton, Sir Robert, a Member of the College of Antiquaries, xviii.
    Their meetings held at his house, xix
  Courtenay, ancient family of, 64. Of Ladocke, pedigree and arms,
    139. Mr. Peter, 88-139. His deaf and dumb servant Edward Bone, 139.
    Hugh, Earl of Devon, 97. Peter, Bishop of Exeter, 97
  Courtenay, Edward, 97. Philip de, 97
  Craneigh, Burchard, his fining house, 130
  Crasthole, 108
  Cuddenbeake, 109
  Cumberland, Earl of, 115
  Cuttayle, a house of the Edgecumbe’s, 114

  Danny, family of, 108
  Darcy, Lord, 114
  Dart of Pentuan, 140
  Daubeny, Lord, 155
  Davies, Mr., 115
  Deer, fallow, 22. Red, 23
  Denham, Lord, 64. Oliver de, 52
  Denis, ancient family of, 64
  Devon, Earls of, 64. Thomas, Earl of, 97. Hugh Courtney, Earl of, 97
  Diamonds, found among the Cornish rocks, 7
  Divines, 59
  Dodderidge, Sir John, a member of the Society of Antiquaries, xviii.
    Publishes an account of the Duchy of Cornwall, xxii
  Dog, a charitable, 113
  Dones, Henry de, (temp. Henry 3), 50
  Dosmery pool, 122
  Draenas, Robert de, (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Drake, Sir Francis, 115-156
  Dreams, 9
  Dudman, a foreland, 141
  Dukes of Cornwall, 76-79
  Dunstanvill, Alan de, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Dynham, John de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51

  Earls of Cornwall, their houses, 78-80
  East Wibilsher, hundred of, 93-94. Knights’ fees and acres (temp.
    Hen. 4), 41. Survey of, 98
  Ebbingford, a house of the Arundels of Trerise, 118
  Edgecumbe of Mount Edgecumbe, pedigree and arms of, 100. Elizabeth,
    ix. Peter, 83-88. Sir Piers, 141. Sir Richard, ix, 61, 99, 114, 141
  Edmund-Magnus, son of King Harold, 97
  Edward 3rd, King, 97
  Edward, the Black Prince, 114
  Egbert, King of Wessex, 96
  Elizabeth, Queen, learned and a patroness of learning, xix
  Erchideakene, Thomas le, 52
  Erisy of Erisy, arms of, 152
  Essex, Earl of, 115
  Estre, William del, 52
  Exeter, Walter Brounscomb, Bishop of, 150. Peter Courtenay, Bishop
    of, 97. John Graundson, Bishop of, 150
  Exon, Walter of, 59

  Fairs, 53
  Falmouth haven, 149
  Feasts 68. Saints, 68
  Ferrers, William de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51
  Fish, 29. Haven fish, 29. How taken, by weares, bakings, saynes,
    tucks and tramels, 30. On the coast, 31. Saynes, 32. Fumados, train,
    pilchard, 33. Plusher, lestercocks, bait, starfish, blubber, 34
  Fish pond, Mr. Carew’s salt water, 104
  Fitz-Geffry, Charles, extracts from his Affanise, xii, xiv
  Flamanc, Mark le, (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Flammock, family of, 127. Thomas, 97
  Flandrensis, Stephen, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Flemming, Roger le, 52
  Forts, 84
  Foxes, 22
  Foy, 134. Gallants of, 135
  Franchises, 86
  Frobisher, Sir Martyn, 115
  Fryeries, 81
  Fysac, Peter de, 52

  Gaol, county, 90
  Garrisons, 85
  Gentlemen, Cornish, 63
  Gifford, Robert, 52
  Gilbert, Earl of Strigill, 97
  Gilbert, Sir Humfrey, 115
  Glasney College, 150
  Glyn of Glynfoord, arms of, 132
  Godolphin of Godolphin, pedigree and arms, 153. Sir Francis, 83, 85,
    88, 153. Fights some Spanish invaders, 156, &c. Sir William, 61, 62
  Godwin, son of King Harold, 97
  Gold in small quantities found in Cornwall, 7
  Gordon, Lady Katherine, 155
  Government, 76. Spiritual, 80. Temporal, 82. Martial, 82. Civil, 85
  Grampound, 140
  Greinvile, ancient family of, 64. Of Penheale, pedigree and arms of,
    116. Bernard, 83, 88. John, 62. Roger, 62. Sir Richard, 62, 111, 115
  Grenefild, William de, Archbishop of York, 59
  Grenevyle, Richard de, 52
  Grenvile, Richard de (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Griffin ap Conan, Prince of Wales, 97
  Grisling, a deaf man, understanding speech by sight, 113
  Guard of sea coast, 84
  Guary miracle, 71

  Hacumb, Jordon de, (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Halgaver Court, 126
  Hall walk, 132
  Hamoaze, 100
  Handcock, Edward, 88
  Hanter Davis, a rock with ebbing and flowing water, 151
  Harris of Trecarel, arms of, 116. Of Lanreast, arms of, 132. Arthur,
    83, 88. Christopher, 83, 88. John, 83, 88
  Harvest dinners, 68
  Havens, 26
  Hawkins, Sir John, 115, 156
  Hawks, 25
  Hay, Walter, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Hearle, arms of, 143
  Hechin, arms of, 112
  Helford, 151
  Helston, 150
  Hendor, John, 63, 88
  Hengsten, 115
  Henpoint, 113
  Henry 1, King, 97
  Henry 7, King, 97, 99
  Henry, Prince of Wales, Sir John Dodderidge’s account of Cornwall
    dedicated to him, xxiii
  Herbs, 10
  Heriots, 37
  Hill of Penwarne, arms of, 140. Mr. Otwell, 83, 88, 140
  Hills of Cornwall, 6
  History of Cornwall, 96
  Holcomb of Fentengollan, 142
  Horses, 24
  Hospitals, 81
  Houses, religious, 81
  Hundreds, 86
  Huntingdon, John Earl of, 146
  Hurlers, 129
  Hurling, 73
  Husbandmen, 66
  Huwyse, Richard de, 52

  Inhabitants, 36
  Inswork, 101
  Intercourse, 53
  Islands, 26
  Ivor, son to the King of Bretagne, 96

  James 1, King, unlearned and pedantic, xix
  Joseph, Michael, 98
  Judges, 89
  Jurisdiction for tin, causes, charter, 16. Officers, supreme, lord
    warden, vice warden, 17. Inferior, stewards, gaylour, 18. Juries,
    great, petty, 18. Witnesses, 18
  Justices of the peace, 88

  Kan, Thomas de, 52
  Karrow, alias Carew, ancient family of, 64
  Katherine, Lady, wife of Prince Arthur, 114
  Keckwitch of Catchfrench, pedigree and arms of, 109
  Kekewiche, George, 88
  Kellerion, John de, 52
  Kempthorne of Tonacumb, arms of, 118
  Kendal of Treworgy, pedigree and arms, 132. Mr. William, 137
  Kennals, Dr., 59
  Kenrick, King of Wessex, 96
  Kerier, hundred of, 90, 95. Knights’ fees and acres, 3rd Henry 4,
    44. Survey of, 149
  Killigrew of Arwenacke, pedigree and arms, 150. Sir Henry, 61
  Kilter, a Cornish rebel, 98
  Kingston, Sir Anthony, 124
  Knights’ fees and acres in Cornwall, anno 3 Henry 4, 39, &c.
  Knolles, Sir Robert, 156
  Kylgat, John de, 52
  Kymyell, Henry de, 52

  Lacell, Galfred de, (temp. Rich. 1), 50
  Lagherne, arms of, 153
  Lambron, John de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51. John de, 52
  Land’s End, 159
  Langdon of Chevereul, arms of, 110
  Langherne, 149
  Language, 55
  Lanhadron Park, 140. An oak there with leaves speckled white, 140
  Lansladeron, Serlo de, 52
  Lanyne, arms of, 153
  Lauelis, family, 159
  Launceston, 116
  Lawhitton, 115
  Lawyers, common, 59
  Lazar houses, 68
  Learned men, 58 &c.
  Lercedekne, Thomas, (Edw. 2), 51
  Lerchedekne, Sir John, 102
  Lesnewith Hundred, 92, 93. Knights’ fees and acres, anno 3 Henry 4,
    39. Survey of, 120
  Lice, 22
  Limestone found in Cornwall, 6
  Liskeard, 128
  Longevity, 63
  Looe, East, 127. West, 127
  Lopoole, 152
  Lostwithiel, 137. Ancient custom there, 137
  Lower, arms of, 117. Of St. Winowe, 132. Thomas, 88, 132. William, 62
  Lyner, river, 102

  Malet, ancient family of, 64
  Manaton, arms of, 117
  Marcajew, 156
  Margaret, Queen, wife to Henry 6, 97
  Markets, 53
  Marney, Lord, 63
  Mats, manufactured, 19
  May, arms of, 128, 132
  Measures, 54
  Members sent to Parliament, 90
  Meneag, 152
  Mesvile, William de, 97
  Mesy, Roger de, (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Metals found in Cornwall, 6
  Meules, Roger de, 52
  Milbrook, 101
  Militia, Cornish, 83
  Minerals of Cornwall, stones, pebbles, slate, limestones, 6
  Miners, ancient family of, 64
  Mines, tin, 8, &c. _see Tin_.
  Mohun, ancient family of, 64. Of Hall, pedigree and arms, 133. Sir
    Reginald, 63, 83, 88, 132, 133. Sir William, 63
  Montford, Earl, 97
  Montgomery, Count, 115
  Morton, William Earl of, 154
  Mount Edgecumb, 99
  Mount’s bay, 156
  Mousehole, 156
  Moyle of Bake, pedigree and arms, 109. Robert, 88
  Mules, 24
  Murth, 131

  Names, general, 54. Personal, 54
  Nansperyan, arms of, 153
  Nants, formerly Trengove, of Nants, arms of, 154
  Nantswell, superstitious practice there, 144
  Naphant, Sir John, 61
  Nazaleod, 96
  New Kay, 148
  Nichols, family, 127
  Nobility of Cornwall, 63
  Norris, Sir John, 115
  Northampton, John, Lord Mayor of London, 121
  Nottingham, Earl of, 115
  Nunneries, 81

  Oak, in Lanhadron Park, with leaves speckled white, 140
  Oliver, William, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Ordnance and munition, 84
  Orewood, 27
  Other-half-stone, 128
  Otters, 22
  Oxford, Earl of, 114. John de Vere, Earl of, 155
  Oysters, 30

  Padstowe, 143
  Parcks, Humphrey, 83
  Parishes, 41
  Parker, Sir Nicholas, 83, 88, 150. His arms, 150
  Parks, 23
  Pearls, Cornish, 7
  Pebbles, found on the Cornish coast, 6
  Pendennis fort, 149
  Peng, Henry de, (temp. Edw. 2), 51
  Penkevel, family of, 127. Arms of, 142
  Penrose, Mr., 152. His arms, 152
  Penryn, 150
  Penwith hundred, 90, 94. Knights’ fees and acres, anno 3 Henry 4,
    39. Survey of, 153
  Penzance, 156. Burned by a Spanish invasion, 156
  Percy, Sir Thomas, 135
  Pernwarne, arms of, 153
  Petit, Michael le, 52
  Peverell, Hugh, 52
  Peyton, Mr. Thomas, 142
  Physicians, 59
  Pider hundred, 91, 95. Knights’ fees and acres, 43. Survey of, 143
  Plymouth haven, 98, 114
  Polpera, 131
  Polwhele, arms of, 143
  Pombre, Henry de la, (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Pomeray, ancient family of, 64. Henry de la, 52, 154. Arms of, 142
  Ponds, 26
  Poor, 67
  Population, 57
  Porter, arms of, 112
  Porternis, 156
  Portugal, Don Antonio, King of, 115
  Posts, 85
  Powder hundred, 91, 95. Knights’ fees and acres, anno 3 Henry 4, 43.
    Survey of, 134
  Power, Sir H., 157
  Prake, a miller of Bretagne, 131
  Prideaux, arms of, 143. Mr. Nicholas, 88, 143
  Pridias, Thomas, de 52
  Pridyas, Roger, (temp. Ed. 2), 51
  Princes, Cornish, 76
  Probus steeple, 140
  Pryories, 81
  Pyn, John de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51

  Quoykyn, Roland de, 52

  Raleigh, Sir Walter, 62, 83, 115. Lieutenant-General of Cornwall,
    xviii. Mr. Carew’s Survey of Cornwall dedicated to him, xx. Kinsman
    to Mr. Carew, xxi
  Raleigh, Carew, son of Sir Walter, xxi
  Ramehead, 98
  Rashleigh, arms of, 136
  Rates, 86
  Rats, 22
  Recreations, 68
  Regiments of militia, 83
  Reskimer, arms of, 151
  Reskymmer, Roger de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51. Richard de, 52
  Resorgan, a Cornish rebel, 98
  Restormel castle, 137
  Richard 3rd, King, 97
  Richard Earl of Cornwall, 97
  Rivers, 26
  Roche, 138
  Roche, Odo de la, 52
  Roderick, King of the Britons, 96
  Romane, John, 63
  Roscarrock of Roscarrock, family and arms of, 127
  Roseland, 141
  Rouse, ancient family of, 64. Of Halton, pedigree, 113. Arms, 114.
    Anthony, 83, 88
  Royalties in the Dukes of Cornwall, 79
  Rufe, Ralph de, (temp. Rich. 1), 49

  St. Agnes, 148
  St. Aubyn, ancient family of, 64. Of Clowance, pedigree and arms of,
    152. Thomas, 88
  St. Burien’s, 159
  St. Columb’s, 144
  St. George’s Island, 128
  St. German’s, 108
  St. Ives, 154
  St. Kayne’s well, 129
  St. Keveren parish, 98
  St. Maw’s castle, 142, 149
  St. Michael’s mount, 154
  St. Neot’s, 129
  St. Nicholas island, 99
  St. Nunne’s pool, boussening insane people at, 123
  St. Peran in Zabulo, 148
  St. Wynnoko, Philip de, 52
  Salisbury, Earl of, 114
  Salmon, trout, and peal, 28
  Saltash, 112
  Salt mills, 26
  Salt water pond for fish, Mr. Carew’s, 104. Mr. Bevill’s, 137
  Sand, 27
  Sarum, William Earl of, 97
  Saulay, or Saule, ancient family of, 64
  Sawle, arms of, 143
  Sayers, Mr., 142
  Scarlet’s well, 126
  Schools, free, 61
  Scilly, 85
  Sea, 26
  Sea fowl, 35
  Seaton, 110
  Sessions, quarter, 88
  Shells and nuts, 27
  Shipping, 27
  Shooting, 72
  Sidney, Sir Philip, x
  Silver formerly found in Cornwall, 7
  Sisters, nine great stones so called, 143
  Size, John, the strange servant of Sir William Bevill, 130
  Skewich, John, 59
  Slate found in Cornwall, 6
  Smith, of Tregonnock, Mr. Thomas, his pedigree and arms, 110
  Snakestones, 21
  Soleigny, John de, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Sor, Osbert le, 52
  Springs, 26
  Spurre, arms of, 117
  Statesmen, 61
  Steviock, 108
  Stonehouse, West, 100
  Stones found in Cornwall, 6
  Stow, Mr. a member of the College of Antiquaries, xviii
  Stow, a house of the Greinvile’s, 118
  Stratton, 117
  Stratton hundred, 92, 94. Knights’ fees and acres, anno 3 Henry 4,
    40. Survey of, 117
  Stukeleigh, Thomas, 115
  Suffolk, Earl of, 114
  Swallows, 25

  Taluran, John de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51
  Tanner, arms of, 142
  Temple, parish, 127
  Tenements, customary, duchy tenure, conventionary tenants, 36
  Thurlebere, John de, 52
  Thurnay, Simon, 58
  Tide-well, spring, 138
  Tin, the chief product of Cornwall, 7. Tin works of two kinds, load
    works, stream works, 8. New working, 9. Color, bigness,
    adventurers in the tin works, the captain, labourers, tools,
    manner of working, 10. Conveyance, loose earth, rocks, damps,
    water, engines, adits, manner of dressing, breaking, stamping,
    drying, 11. Crazing, washing, blowing, sharing block tin, melting,
    12. Severall, wastrell, bounds, doales, measure, towns and times
    for coinage, 13. Postcoinage, officers, coinage price, usury of
    London merchants, 14. Of country dwellers, 15. Jurisdiction, 16,
    &c. _See Jurisdiction._ Preemption, 17
  Tintogel castle, 120
  Townsmen, 65
  Tracy, Thomas de, (temp. Henry 3), 50
  Treasure not found, 136
  Trebegean, 159
  Tredeleberg, Henry de, (temp. Rich. 1), 49
  Tredenick, arms of, 149
  Trees, for fruit, 20. Fuel, timber, 21
  Treffrey of Foy, pedigree and arms of, 134. Mr. William, 83, 88, 134
  Trefusis of Trefusis, arms of, 150. Mr. John, 16
  Tregian of Wolveden, pedigree and arms, 140
  Tregny, 141
  Tregodeck, arms of, 117
  Tregonwel, Sir John, 61
  Tregose, arms of, 151
  Tregoyes, Lords, 63
  Tregury, Michael, 59
  Treiagu, John de, (temp. Ed. 2), 50
  Trelawney of Poole, pedigree and arms, 117. Sir Jonathan, 83, 88
  Trem, Walter de, 52
  Trematon castle, 111
  Tremayn, Mr. Richard, 140. His arms, 141
  Trenaga, Richard de, 52
  Trenance, pedigree and arms, 148
  Trenowith, Sir Henry, 141
  Trevanion of Caryhayes, pedigree and arms, 141. Mr. Charles, 83, 87,
    88, 141
  Trevisa, arms of, 117. Of Crocadon, arms of, 114. John, 59
  Trewardreth, 136
  Trewynard, Martin, 21
  Trewynt, Stephen de, 52
  Trewythen, Stephen de, 52
  Trigge hundred, 92, 93. Knights’ fees and acres, anno 3 Henry 4, 42.
    Survey of, 123
  Tristram, Sir, 61
  Trivet, Thomas, 59
  Truro, 141
  Tynten, John de, (temp. Ed. 2), 51
  Tynton, John de, 52

  Valletort, Reginald de, (t. (Ric. 1), 49. Philip de, temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Veale of Bodmin, 62
  Vivian, Mr., 142. His arms, 142. Hannibal, 83, 88
  Volunteers, 84

  Wadebridge, 143
  Wallingford castle, 80
  Warbeck, Perkyn, 98, 124, 155
  Waters of Cornwall, fresh springs, rivers, ponds, sea, 26
  Waunford, Thomas de, 52
  Weights, 54
  West Wibilsher hundred, 92, 94. Knights’ fees and acres, anno 3
    Henry 4, 42. Survey of, 127
  Wibilsher hundred, East and West, _see East and West_
  Wideslade of Tregarrick, a Cornish rebel, 98, 131. His son, called
    Sir Tristram, 131
  Wike, St. Mary, 119
  Williams of Probus, a farmer and patriarch, 140. John, a physician, 60
  Wise, William, (temp. Hen. 3), 50
  Wivel, house of Mr., 111
  Wolsey, Cardinal, 61
  Woodcocks, 25
  Woods, 21
  Worms, 21
  Wotton, 110
  Wray of Trebigh, William, 88, 117. His pedigree and arms, 117
  Wray, George, 62
  Wreck, 27
  Wrestling, 75

  Yeomanry, 66

       *     *     *     *     *

_References from the folios of the original edition of Carew’s Survey
to the pages of Lord Dunstanville’s edition._

                        Edition by Lord
  Original Edition.      Dunstanville.
       Folio                 Page
         5                    11
        10                    31
        15                    47
        20                    62
        25                    82
        30                    94
        35                   106
        40                   121
        45                   129
        50                   136
        55                   147
        60                   171
        65                   180
        70                   188
        75                   197
        80                   205
        85                   214
        90                   223
        95                   230
       100                   239
       105                   248
       110                   260
       115                   271
       120                   282
       125                   292
       130                   304
       135                   315
       140                   326
       145                   345
       150                   362
       155                   378
       160                   387




INDEX.



  Abbat, derivation of, ii. 61
  ―――― of St. German’s, ii. 59
  Abbe Tone, or abbey town, ii. 59
  Abbitown, now St. German’s, i. 32
  Abbot, Mr. i. 125
  Abbytone, ii. 62
  Abchurch, St. Mary, rectory, London, i. 72
  Aberdeen, i. 247
  Abergavenny, Lord, i. 87
  Abernethy, now St. Andrew’s, iv. 105
  Abingdon abbey, i. 342
  Abraham, i. 414
  Acacia armata, iv. 181
  ―――― dealbata, iv. 183
  ―――― lopantha, iv. 183
  Achaia in Greece, iv. 161
  Achelous, the river god, ii. 161
  Achym, William, monument to, iii. 292.――Thomas, family arms, and
    etymology of the name, iv. 23
  Acland, Sir John, iii. 271. Sir Thomas, 42, 274. Sir T. D. 271.――Of
    Killerton, iv. 16. Colonel, 185.――Family, ii. 416
  Acre, comparison of the Cornish, Saxon, and Norman, iii. 388
  Acres, the number of in Cornwall, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Act of Parliament for improving Truro, iv. 80
  Acton castle, iii. 311
  Acton of Acton Scot, i. 400
  Addis, i. 417.――John and William, iii. 38
  Adelredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adelstowe, iii. 277, 278 _bis_
  Adis of Plymouth, i. 420
  Adlington, John, iv. 77
  Admiralty, Nicholas Trevanion, commissioner of the, iv. 116
  Adobed, Reginald, i. 134
  Adour, river, iv. 159
  Adredus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Adrian, Emperor, i. 393――iv. 117
  Adrian, Pope, ii. 212
  Adriatic sea, iv. 172
  Adulphus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Advent, alias St. Anne parish, i. 62, 129, 132――ii. 401 _bis_,
    408――iii. 222
  ADVENT parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, boundaries,
    etymology of name, saint, church patron, land tax, i. 1. By
    Tonkin, name, Trethym. By Whitaker, etymology, saint’s history 2.
    By Lysons, villages, manor of Trelagoe. By the Editor, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 3
  Adwen, St. history of, i. 2
  Æschylus, iii. 34
  Africa, iii. 187 _bis_
  Agapanthus umbellatus, iv. 181
  Agar, Mrs. i. 384.――Hon. C. B. ii. 381. Mr. 57. Mrs. 197, 258,
    348.――Mr. iv. 44
  Agincourt, battle of, iii. 316
  Agnes, St. iii. 312, 313
  ―――― St. church, iii. 176
  ―――― St. island, ii. 358――iv. 173, 174. By Leland, Appendix, 266.
    Its extent 175.――Lighthouse upon, ii. 358――iv. 175. Its latitude
    and longitude, and time of high water 175
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 234, 235, 317, 402――iii. 380
  AGNES, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, land tax,
    church, i. 4. Saint’s history 5. Feast, Carne Buryanacht, St.
    Agnes ball 6. Manors and seats, Mithian 7. Trevellis, Trevawnance
    8. By Tonkin, etymology of Pider, Kyvere Ankou, Trevannence; the
    same from Lysons, Breanis, description and productions 10. By
    Lysons, harbour at Trevannence Porth 11. Market, Porth Chapel,
    Chapel at Mola, almshouses and schools 12. By the Editor, remarks
    on the Tonkin family, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 13. The
    beacon 14
  Agnes’ St. ball or plague, i. 6
  ―――― St. beacon, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― St. well, i. 12
  Agonal, iii. 434
  Agricola, Tacitus’s Life of, iii. 162
  Agricolaus, i. 52
  Ahab, King, i. 329
  Aikin, Miss, ii. 77
  Ailmer, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73――iii. 462
  Ainton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Aire, a farm of Mr. Stephens’s where he and his family shut
    themselves up from the plague and escaped, ii. 271
  Alan River, i. 74, 94, 115, 153, 367, 371, 372 _ter._, 373, 375――ii.
    402 _ter._――iii. 277, 334
  Albalanda family, ii. 300, 302, 303 _bis_, 305――iii. 213
  Alban, St. the Briton, ii. 64, 75. His Shrine 74
  Alban’s, St. town, why named, general council of British clergy at,
    St. German preached at, ii. 64. St. German’s chapel at 65
  ―――― St. battle of, ii. 260――iii. 234
  Albemarle, Duke of, ii. 27, 28, 94. His letter of thanks to Capt.
    Penrose 28
  Albigenses, i. 311
  Albiniaco, Philip de, ii. 428
  Alderscombe, account of, ii. 347, 351
  Aldestowe, iii. 278 _bis_
  Aldwinick, ii. 77
  Aldwyn, Bishop of Lindisfarne, i. 290 _bis_
  Alein, by Leland, iv. 262
  Alexander, John, ii. 160
  ―――― the Third, Pope, iii. 115
  Alexandria, ii. 81――iii. 187 _bis_.――St. Catharine born at, ii. 37
  Alfred, King, i. 290 _ter._――ii. 155――iii. 74, 241, 262. The Great,
    visited St. Neot, who appeared to him after death 262. Founded
    Oxford by his advice 263
  Alfridus or Alfricus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alfwaldus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algar, Earl of Cornwall, i. 73 _bis_, 74, 94 _bis_, 95――iii. 462
  Algarus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Algerine pirates stranded in Mount’s Bay, iii. 97
  Algiers, governor of, ii. 100
  Alien priories, their origin, iv. 99. Suppression 101
  All Saints’ day, ii. 150, 287
  All Souls’ college, Oxford, ii. 147, 227, 228――iii. 123, 155, 252, 344
  Allan family, ii. 286
  Allan, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Allanson, Rev. George, of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  Allen, Ralph, history of, i. 56
  ―――― Mr. of Bath, ii. 33. Thomas 233
  ―――― St. iv. 24, 75
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202, 393, 404, 417――ii. 315, 318――iii. 267, 313.
    Living of 300
  ALLEN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, ancient state, i. 15.
    Endowment, first fruits, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land
    tax, Gwarnike 16. Etymology 17. Treonike, tale of a stolen child,
    families originating from church offices, Tretheris chapel 18. By
    Tonkin, Gwairnick, Boswellick, Nancarrow 19. Gwerick, Trerice,
    Trefronick, Talcarne. By Lysons, Villages of Lane and Zela 20. By
    the Editor, name and feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 21
  Allett, i. 415
  Allin, John, iv. 18
  Allington, South, manor, iii. 436
  Allworthy, Fielding’s, i. 57
  Almes Pool Meadow, ii. 41
  Alonzo, King of Castille, i. 311
  Aloysoa citra odora, iv. 181
  Alps, iii. 121, 186.――Miniature model of, ii. 150
  Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  Alric, Earl, stole the body of St. Neot, iii. 263
  Als, John de, i. 144
  Als manor in Buryan, ii. 118
  Alse, i. 144. De Alse of Lelant ibid.
  Alsius, Duke of Devonshire and Cornwall, iii. 415
  Altar cloth, curious, i. 157
  Altarnun parish, i. 62, 129, 159, 167, 174, 196, 197, 201, 257, 304,
    308, 317――ii. 36――iv. 48, 68, 69, 70 Altarnunæ, Alternun, iii. 36,
    39, 260, 335.――Alternunn, ii. 229, 377
  ALTARNUN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 21. Ancient
    state, first fruits, patron, incumbent, land tax, etymology,
    nunnery 22. Trelawny, Peter Jowle 23. Instances of longevity 24.
    By Tonkin, etymology. By the Editor, St. Nun, St. Nun’s well 24.
    St. Nun’s day, extent, villages, fairs, church-tower, statistics.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 25. Stone quarry, Endsleigh cottage 26
  Alured, Col. iv. 186
  Alvacot village, iv. 41
  Alverton manor, ii. 282――iii. 78, 90, 91, 92, 426. Account of 79,
    90.――Lord of, ii. 130
  Alvorton, iv. 164
  Alwalfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Alwolfus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Amadis, John, of Plymouth, i. 348
  Amall manor, iv. 52
  Amalphy in Naples, St. Andrew’s body at, iv. 101
  Amaneth, ii. 203, 211
  Amator, St. Bishop of Auxerre, ii. 73 _bis_
  Ambrose, St. ii. 279
  ―――― Well, i. 247
  Ambrosius, Aurelius, i. 326
  Amellibrea belongs to the Editor, ancient buildings there, iv. 54
  America, iii. 183.――Packets for, receive their despatches at
    Falmouth, ii. 11. Separated from England 245. War with 245,
    267.――No heaths in, iii. 173
  ―――― South, i. 164――iii. 205
  Ammonian harmony, iii. 408
  Amorites, Kings of, ii. 285
  “Amorous Fantasme, a Tragi-Comedy,” iv. 98
  Amural, ii. 367
  Amy, Cotton, of Botreaux Castle, Anne, Grace, and Mr. i.
    134.――Edward and Rev. James, ii. 49.――Cotton, iii. 235, 236.
    Edward 232. Grace 235, 236. Rev. James 232, 235, 236. Mr.
    235.――Family, iv. 62
  Amye, sister of King Arthur, i. 332
  Amyll manor, iv. 55
  Amys, of Botreaux castle, the coheir of, iv. 45
  Anabaptists, iv. 73
  Andegavia, now Angiers, i. 335 _ter._
  Andrew, Anne, and John, ii. 253.――Richard, iii. 387
  ―――― of Trevellance, Jane or Anne, John, iii. 326, 333
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 189――iii. 387.――Mr. ii. 354
  Andrew, St. the Apostle, his history, iv. 100. Occasion of his
    adoption as patron of Scotland 105
  ―――― St. church in Stratton, ii. 427
  ―――― St. church, Holborn, ii. 267
  ―――― St. monastery, university, and city, iv. 105
  ―――― St. priory, i. 167
  Andromache, iii. 420
  Anecdotes of Heraldry by a Lady, iii. 137
  Angarder chapel, iii. 314
  Angarrack, iii. 343
  Ange, Rev. Mr. ii. 24
  Angelo, St., Marq. of, in Spain, descended from the Tregians, iii. 381
  Angiers in France, iv. 100, 144
  Anglesey, i. 295 _bis_
  Angove, iv. 128
  ―――― family, ii. 236, 241 _bis_. Abel 241. Reginald 236, 240.
    Etymology 236.――Richard, iii. 387
  Anhele Nunnery, Truro, ii. 315
  An Marogeth Arvowed, account of, iii. 430
  Anhell, iv. 73
  Anjou, Angiers the capital of, iv. 105
  “Annals, Firbisse’s,” iv. 146
  Anne, Princess, called Anne Eat-all, said to have died from
    overeating, ii. 15
  ―――― Queen, ii. 98――iii. 62 _bis_, 145, 176, 201, 249, 297
    _ter._――iv. 21 _bis_, 23, 116.――The Pitt diamond offered to, i.
    68.――Her last Parliament, ii. 98, 287, 348
  ――――’s, Queen, bounty, ii. 93
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. parish, _see Advent_
  Annual celebrations natural, ii. 288
  Annunciation, i. 157
  Ansbury, diocese of, ii. 81
  Anson, Commodore, iii. 205
  Anthology of Greek Epigrams, iv. 87
  Anthony family, ii. 275
  Anthony parish, ii. 250――iii. 436
  ―――― East manor, i. 33――ii. 252 _ter._――Description of, i. 37
  ―――― East parish, ii. 252――iii. 101
  ―――― St. iii. 113. The patron of fishermen 91
  ―――― St. of Egypt, history of, i. 28, 29. Festival 31
  ―――― St. of Padua, history of, i. 29. Festival 31
  ―――― manor, iii. 209
  ―――― parish, ii. 1, 2, 17, 50 _bis_, 319――iii. 110 _bis_, 128, 380, 456
  ANTHONY St., in Kerrier parish, feast, i. 31. Boundaries, situation,
    ancient state, first fruits, incumbent 32. Land tax, East Anthony,
    and family of Carew 33. Intsworth 36. By Tonkin, East Anthony. By
    Editor, Rt. Hon. Reginald Pole Carew, statistics 37. Church
    monuments, population, incumbent, Geology 38
  ―――― in Kerrier Parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, i. 38. Incumbent, land tax, Saint, Trewothike,
    Roscruge, Denis and Great Denis 39. By Tonkin, Little Dinas, the
    last place that held out for Charles 1st. By Editor, statistics,
    antiquities, Geology 40
  ―――― in Powder parish, ii. 275, 281――iii. 395. Rocks similar to
    those in Gerans, ii. 58
  ―――― in Powder parish, situation, boundaries, i. 26. Ancient state,
    history, Rules of Canons Augustine 27. First fruits, patron, land
    tax, saint’s history and name, Plase, St. Anthony Point 28. By
    Tonkin, Boswartha, Porth. By the Editor, history of St. Anthony of
    Egypt, and of St. Anthony of Padua 29. Legend of the latter, by
    Dr. Darwin 30. Feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 31
  ―――― Point, i. 28
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 51 _bis_. Priory 277
  Anthyllis hermannia, iv. 181
  Anticiodorum, St. German, Bishop of, ii. 59
  Antiocheis, i. 342
  Antiochesis, i. 325
  Antiquarian Society, communication of Mr. Arundell upon Theodore
    Paleologus to, ii. 365
  “Antiquities of Cornwall,” ii. 338――iv. 30
  Antirrhinum monspessulanum, iii. 63
  Antis, John, i. 319
  Antonies, St. by Leland, iv. 270, 289
  Antron, account of, iii. 445
  ―――― of Antron, family, iii. 445
  Antwerp, iii. 67. Nuns from, received at Lanhearne 150
  Antyer Deweth, iii. 431
  Anvilla, Robert de Edune, iv. 77, 82
  Anwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Apeley, i. 223
  Apennines, ii. 213
  Apollo, i. 295
  Apparition, treasure discovered by, i. 162
  Aquitaine, i. 335――iv. 145
  Arabia, iii. 187
  Arcedekne, Thomas de, i. 340.――Alice, John and Thomas, Lords, of
    Warine Family, iii. 405
  Archæologia, iii. 244
  Archdeacon of East Anthony, Thomas, Walter, and arms, i. 33. And of
    Haccomb, Philippa, and Sir Warren 33, 64, 262
  Arche, Sir Richard, i. 168
  Archedecon family, iii. 44. Thomas, Lord de 405
  Archer of Trelaske, N. S. ii. 243――iii. 38 _bis_. Mr. and his
    brother 338. Family and their monuments 37
  ―――― of Trelowick, John, i. 417. John 420. Rev. Mr. 417. William,
    arms 420
  Arcturus, i. 342
  Ardent, a 64 gun ship taken by the French and Spanish combined
    fleets in Plymouth Sound, ii. 246
  Ardeverauian, by Leland, iv. 266
  Ardevermeur, by Leland, iv. 273
  Ardevon parish, ii. 208
  Ardfert, diocese of, iii. 434
  Argand lamps in the Lizard Lighthouses, ii. 359
  Arian clergy, i. 338
  ―――― heresy, iii. 59
  Arianism, i. 115, 252――iii. 64. St. Dye opposed to, ii. 131
  Arians, i. 294――ii. 63. St. Hilary, a violent opponent of 168, 169.
    Furious hostility of St. Ambrose against 279.――St. Martin opposed
    them, iii. 122
  Aristolochia sempervirens, iv. 181
  Aristophanes, ii. 265
  Aristotle, ii. 408
  Arius, i. 305.――His heresy, ii. 63
  Armagh, St., Malachy Archbishop of, ii. 225
  Armes in Castle Cairden, iv. 262
  Armorica, i. 115――iii. 336 _bis_.――Or Little Britain, iv. 157
  Armorican tongue, iii. 114
  Arms of Achym, iv. 23
  ―――― Albalonda, ii. 303
  ―――― Arcedekne, i. 33――iii. 405
  ―――― Archer, i. 420
  ―――― Arthur, King, i. 336
  ―――― Arundell, i. 162, 405――iii. 142, 149, 270 _bis_――iv.
    72.――Crest, i. 405
  ―――― Baldwin, iii. 66
  ―――― Barret, ii. 89
  ―――― Basset, ii. 239
  ―――― Bastard, i. 320
  ―――― Beare, i. 405――iv. 22
  ―――― Beauchamp, ii. 130 _bis_
  ―――― Beel, ii. 252
  ―――― Bellot, i. 302
  ―――― Bennet, iii. 3
  ―――― Berkeley, ii. 11――iv. 14
  ―――― Betenson, iii. 23
  ―――― Bevill, i. 17――iv. 22, 72
  ―――― Bickton, i. 412
  ―――― Billing, iv. 95
  ―――― Blewet, i. 210 _bis_――iv. 95
  ―――― Bochym, ii. 131, 302
  ―――― Bodrigan, ii. 107 _bis_――iii. 119
  ―――― Boggan, ii. 320
  ―――― Bone, ii. 353
  ―――― Bonithon, i. 302――iii. 226
  ―――― Borlase, i. 18――iii. 84
  ―――― Boscawen, i. 140
  ―――― Bosistow, iii. 35
  ―――― Bowden, ii. 303
  ―――― Bray, ii. 311
  ―――― Budeoxhed, i. 348
  ―――― Buller, iii. 249
  ―――― Caddock, Earl of Cornw., i. 203
  ―――― Call, i. 162
  ―――― Camelford borough, ii. 404
  ―――― Carlyon, i. 54
  ―――― Carmenow, iii. 129――iv. 72
  ―――― Carne, i. 10
  ―――― Carnsew, ii. 337
  ―――― Carrow, i. 35
  ―――― Carter, i. 223
  ―――― Carverth, ii. 94, 337
  ―――― Cavall, ii. 335 _bis_
  ―――― Chamond, ii. 414
  ―――― Champernown, ii. 254 _quat._
  ―――― Cheyney, iv. 43
  ―――― Chynoweth, i. 292
  ―――― Coke, i. 395, 396
  ―――― Coplestone, ii. 293
  ―――― Coren, iii. 3
  ―――― Coryton, iii. 162
  ―――― Coswarth, i. 211
  ―――― Cottell, ii. 352
  ―――― Courtenay, iv. 96
  ―――― Crane, iii. 387
  ―――― Damerell, iii. 61
  ―――― D’Angers, iii. 226
  ―――― Davies, i. 361
  ―――― Davis, i. 144
  ―――― Dawnay, iii. 437, 438
  ―――― Dinham, i. 170
  ―――― Dodson, i. 412
  ―――― Dundagell borough, i. 323
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 103――iv. 72
  ―――― Egleshayle, i. 374
  ―――― Erisey, ii. 116――iii. 419
  ―――― Ferrers, iii. 134
  ―――― Fitzroy, ii. 11
  ―――― Fitz-William, ii. 410
  ―――― Flammock, i. 85
  ―――― Fowey town, ii. 38
  ―――― German’s, St. priory, ii. 63
  ―――― Glynn, i. 172――ii. 142
  ―――― Godolphin, i. 124――ii. 335
  ―――― Grosse, iii. 249
  ―――― Hare, i. 406
  ―――― Harris, ii. 122
  ―――― Hawes, ii. 300, 316
  ―――― Hawkins, i. 45
  ―――― Heale, i. 107
  ―――― Heart, ii. 152
  ―――― Hele, iv. 152
  ―――― Helston borough, ii. 156
  ―――― Hemley, i. 384
  ―――― Hext, i. 44
  ―――― Hill, ii. 136――iii. 191
  ―――― Hobbs, ii. 54
  ―――― Hoblyn, i. 223
  ―――― Hooker, iii. 203
  ―――― Howeis, ii. 304
  ―――― Ives, St. borough, ii. 258
  ―――― Ives, St. town, ii. 271
  ―――― Keate, i. 224
  ―――― Kekewich, i. 372――ii. 410
  ―――― Kelliow, ii. 399
  ―――― Kellyow, i. 320
  ―――― Kemell, i. 265
  ―――― Kempe, ii. 54
  ―――― Kendall, i. 319
  ―――― Kestell, iii. 112, 113
  ―――― Killigrew, ii. 7
  ―――― Killiton borough, ii. 310
  ―――― King, i. 204
  ―――― King John, iv. 71
  ―――― Lambron, iii. 316
  ―――― Lamellin, ii. 411
  ―――― Lanyon, ii. 142, 143
  ―――― Laughairne, ii. 316
  ―――― Leveale, i. 143
  ―――― Ley, i. 396
  ―――― Littleton, iii. 227
  ―――― Long, i. 378
  ―――― Looe, West, borough, iv. 21
  ―――― Manaton, ii. 231
  ―――― Marney, iii. 65
  ―――― Matthew, ii. 337
  ―――― Mawe’s, St. borough, ii. 276
  ―――― Mawgan, iii. 148
  ―――― Megara bishopric, i. 75, 94
  ―――― Milliton, i. 125
  ―――― Mohun, i. 351――iv. 96
  ―――― Molesworth, i. 370
  ―――― Morton, iv. 3
  ―――― Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― Murth, iv. 25
  ―――― Mydhop, i. 320
  ―――― Nance, ii. 239――iv. 129
  ―――― Nanfan, i. 408
  ―――― Nanskevall, or Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Nansperian, i. 349
  ―――― Neville, cognizance, ii. 38
  ―――― Nicholls, ii. 339
  ―――― Noye, iii. 145, 151 _bis_
  ―――― Opie, i. 399
  ―――― Oxford, i. 58.――City, ii. 404
  ―――― Paleolagus, ii. 365
  ―――― Parker, i. 136――ii. 12 _bis_
  ―――― Parkings, iv. 140
  ―――― Payne, ii. 198
  ―――― Paynter, i. 349, 350
  ―――― Pendarves, i. 161――ii. 93, 98
  ―――― Pendre, i. 143
  ―――― Penkivell, i. 297
  ―――― Penrose, iii. 443
  ―――― Penwarne, iii. 75, 77
  ―――― Peter, iii. 176
  ―――― Peverell, i. 368
  ―――― Polkinghorne, ii. 142
  ―――― Polwhele, i. 205
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297
  ―――― Porter, iii. 66
  ―――― Prideaux, ii. 242――iii. 56, 279
  ―――― Prout, iii. 66
  ―――― Pye, iii. 449
  ―――― Quarme, i. 256, 422
  ―――― Rame, iii. 374
  ―――― Randyll, i. 421――ii. 353
  ―――― Rashleigh, i. 43
  ―――― Ravenscroft, i. 374
  ―――― Renaudin, iii. 303
  ―――― Reskymer, iii. 133――iv. 96
  ―――― Richard, King of the Romans, ii. 8――iii. 169
  ―――― Robarts, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380
  ―――― Robins, iv. 117
  ―――― Robinson, iii. 422
  ―――― Rogers, iii. 76
  ―――― Romans, _see Richard_
  ―――― Roscrow, ii. 337
  ―――― Rosogan, i. 400
  ―――― Rous, i. 313
  ―――― Sandys, iii. 158 _bis_
  ―――― Sargeaux, ii. 395
  ―――― Scawen, ii. 68
  ―――― Scobell, i. 44
  ―――― Scobhall, i. 44
  ―――― Scrope, iii. 129, 130
  ―――― Searle, i. 37
  ―――― Seccombe, i. 417
  ―――― Serischall, iii. 225
  ―――― Seriseaux, iii. 225
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Silly, iii. 237
  ―――― Slanning, iii. 76
  ―――― Smith, i. 250
  ―――― Speccott, i. 379
  ―――― Spour, ii. 227
  ―――― Sprye, i. 28
  ―――― Tencreek, i. 255
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 337――iii. 326
  ―――― Thoms, iii. 125
  ―――― Tonkin, i. 9, 13――iii. 315
  ―――― Treago, i. 249
  ―――― Treby, i. 412
  ―――― Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― Tredenham, iii. 361 _bis_
  ―――― Tredinick, i. 116――iv. 95
  ―――― Treffreye, ii. 43
  ―――― Trefusis, iii. 318, 227
  ―――― Tregagle, iii. 265
  ―――― Tregarthyn, ii. 110
  ―――― Tregeare, i. 263, 264
  ―――― Tregian, iii. 357
  ―――― Tregonell, i. 247
  ―――― Tregony borough, i. 296
  ―――― Tregoze, i. 39
  ―――― Trehaire, iii. 355
  ―――― Trehawke, iii. 169
  ―――― Trelawder, iv. 95
  ―――― Trelawney, i. 23――iii. 169, 295――iv. 96
  ―――― Trembleth, iii. 405
  ―――― Tremere, ii. 385
  ―――― Trenance, iv. 161
  ―――― Trencreek, i. 256
  ―――― Trengove, iv. 129
  ―――― Trenowith, ii. 107
  ―――― Trenowth, iv. 72
  ―――― Trenwith, ii. 259
  ―――― Trethurfe, ii. 353
  ―――― Trevanion, iii. 200
  ―――― Trevillian, i. 198
  ―――― Trevisa, i. 314
  ―――― Trewhythenick, i. 207
  ―――― Trewinard, i. 136, 346
  ―――― Trewolla, ii. 110
  ―――― Trewoofe, i. 142
  ―――― Trewoolla, i. 206
  ―――― Treworthen, iii. 269
  ―――― Trewren, i. 237
  ―――― Tripcony, ii. 124
  ―――― Typpet, iv. 139
  ―――― Uter Pendragon, i. 326
  ―――― Vaughan, i. 39
  ―――― Vere, ii. 185
  ―――― Vincent, i. 205――ii. 227 _bis_
  ―――― Vivian, i. 76, 94, 222
  ―――― Vyvyan, iii. 135
  ―――― Walesborough, iii. 116
  ―――― Wayte, i. 244
  ―――― Webber, ii. 336
  ―――― William, i. 53, 396
  ―――― Williams, iii. 145 _bis_, 355 _bis_, 356
  ―――― Winter, ii. 304
  ―――― Woolridge, i. 256
  ―――― Worth, iii. 60
  ―――― Wrey, i. 411
  ―――― Yeo, ii. 87
  Army, argument upon, ii. 76
  Arrish Mow, ii. 57
  Arscott, Denis, iv. 157. Tristram 41. Mrs. 157. Family 127, 157
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 336
  ―――― Mevagissey, Rev. John, iii. 195
  ―――― Tetcot, i. 370, 375
  Arsenic, process of extracting, iii. 305
  Arthur, Francis, i. 282
  ―――― King, i. 305, 323, 339 _ter._, 341, 372, 404――ii. 50, 214, 259,
    308, 403 _bis_.――His parentage, i. 326, 331. Birth 332. History
    333. Death 337. His arms 336. Lines upon him 325. Merlin’s
    prophecy of him 333. His tomb, and finding of his body 337. Lord
    Bacon’s opinion of him 340.――The British Hector, slain near
    Camelford, in battle against Mordred, verses upon, ii. 402. Born
    on the same shore. Stone bearing his name 403――The spot where he
    received his death wound marked by a stone, iii. 236
  ―――― King, acts of, iii. 163
  ―――― Prince, Romance of, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of Brittany, heir of Richard’s crown, ii. 178
  ――――’s admirals, i. 338
  ―――― castle, i. 343
  ―――― round table, i. 338
  ―――― stone, account of, i. 220
  ―――― table and tressels of gold, i. 338
  Artificial reef, iii. 379
  Artire river, iii. 457
  Artocarpus, or breadfruit tree, iv. 45
  Arun river, iii. 206
  Arundell, or Arundale in Sussex, iii. 206
  ―――― i. 113, 121, 125, 167, 198, 210, 213, 298, 317 _quat._, 318,
    319, 386, 392, 420, 421 _bis_. Humphrey 301. John de 405. Sir John
    213. Sir John 218. Margery 38. Renphry 125, 418. Sir Renphry
    213.――Family, ii. 128, 354, 415. Their property in Cornwall, sale
    of 147. Rev. F. V. J. 140, 365. Rector of Landulph 387. General
    192, 193, 196, 197. Geffery 195. Humphrey, Governor of St.
    Michael’s Mount 198. Humphrey the rebel 326. Jane 124. John 9.
    Lord, sale of his property 128. Richard Lord, governor of
    Pendennis castle 14. William 123. Mr. 123, 124.――Sir John, iii.
    332, 396. Richard 267. Thomas 141. Lord 343, 344. Miss 80, 369.
    Mr. 201. Family 83, 85, 137, 240, 269, 333, 343, 445. Arms 142.
    Monuments to 151. Origin of name 142, 150. Property 353.――Sir
    John, iv. 153. Lord 106. Miss 116. A younger branch of the family
    16. Arms 72
  ―――― of Caryhayes, heir of, iii. 202
  ―――― Clifton family, ii. 372. Lived at Clifton ibid. Alexander, Sir
    John, Mary 375. Thomas, Sir Thomas 371, 373. William 375
  ―――― St. Colomb Major, Elizabeth, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas ibid.
  ―――― Gloucestershire, iii. 142
  ―――― Lanherne, i. 218, 223, 405 _ter._ Edmond 121 _bis_. John,
    Bishop of Exeter 218. Sir John 415. Sir John or Renfry 120. Lord
    170. Renfry 218. Crest 405.――Humphrey, ii. 191, 192. Sir John 145,
    146 _ter._ Family 127, 147, 148, 149.――Sir Edmund, iii. 316.
    Edward 318. Elizabeth 140, 316 _bis_, 317. John 140 _quater_. Sir
    John, _bis_. Sir John, Sheriff 141. John, Bishop of Litchfield and
    Coventry, memoir of, ib. Sir John, the last possessor 142, 150.
    Sir John 143 _bis_, 148, 196, 201, 316 _bis_, 339. John de 269.
    Ralph 268, 269 _bis_. Renfry and Renfry 141. Sir Renfry 316 _bis_.
    Renfry 316. Richard B. 141. Miss 141. Mr. 140, 357. Family 104,
    140, 145, 268, 274, 391. Character of 150. Arms 149, 270. Lines on
    149. Name 142. Called “The Great Arundells” 140, 149,
    150.――Family, iv. 3, 103, 106, 161
  ―――― Lanheme and Wardour family, iv. 154
  ―――― Menadarva, i. 161, _ter._ John ib. Arms 162.――Family, iii. 85
  ―――― Sythney, i. 65
  ―――― Talverne, i. 222. John 65. Sir John 123. Sir Thomas 346,
    356.――Tolverne Grace, iii. 183. Sir John ib. 325 _ter._ Family
    104, 142, 149――ii. 256, 257, 276 _bis_, 279, 280, 336. Sir John,
    obtained a pardon for Lady Killigrew 6. Sir Thomas 170
  ―――― Tregarthin and Caryhayes, iv. 116
  ―――― Trembleth, i. 213, 405.――Mr. ii. 146.――In St. Ervan, Sir R.
    iii. 149. Family 140
  ―――― Tremodart in Duloe, Thomas, iv. 34 _ter._ Family 34 _bis_
  ―――― Trerice, i. 17, 19, 20 _bis_, 210, 211, 319. John 161. Sir John
    415. Lord 415.――John, father of Richard, called John of Tilbury,
    governor of Pendennis castle, besieged there by parliament forces,
    ii. 13. Sir John 185. Sent to reduce the Earl of Oxford at St.
    Michael’s Mount 183. Stormed it, killed, and his troops repulsed,
    his fortune told 184. Richard, his marriage 13.――Anne, iii. 199,
    201. John 199, 201, 269. Sir John 213. Sir John, story of 274. Sir
    John, called “The Tilbury” and “John for the King” 270, 274. John
    Lord 267, 325. Monument to Margaret his wife 271. Ralph 270. Sir
    Richard first Lord, and his grandson 274. Miss 141. Family 104.
    Arms and vault 270.――Family, iv. 13, 16
  ―――― Trethall, John and Prudence, ii. 320
  ―――― Trevethick family, iii. 142, 149.――Or Trevithick, Thomas, i.
    223 _bis_. Family 223
  ―――― Wardour, Lords, iii. 142, 149, 150 _bis_. Lord 352 _bis_. Henry
    8th Lord, sold his Cornish property 151
  Arundell castle, iii. 142 _bis_.
  ―――― Ederick, Saxon Earl of, iii. 142
  ―――― town, iii. 142 _bis_.
  Arundo aremaria, iii. 6
  Arwennak, by Leland, iv. 270
  Arwinick, i. 398――iii. 75.――Manor, etymology, ii. 4, 17.
    Inhabitants, house built by Sir John Killigrew 5. Present
    possessor 6
  Arwinike, i. 136, 137
  Arworthal manor, account of, iii. 302
  Asa, William, ii. 192
  Asan, brother-in-law of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 367
  Asaph, St. Jeffery of Monmouth, Bishop of, i. 342
  Asche, by Leland, iv. 281
  Ashburnham, Lord, iv. 14
  Ashmolean museum, i. 300――iii. 50, 52
  Asia, the Lesser, iv. 172
  ―――― Minor, the castles of, ii. 423
  Asparagus officinalis, iii. 260
  Asperville, Oliver de, iv. 28
  Asshe, by Leland, iv. 291
  Assium, or Assissum, i. 80, 81, 174
  Aster argophyllus, iv. 181
  Astle, Thomas, ancient MS. in his library, iv. 190
  Astley, ii. 186
  Astronomer royal, ii. 222, 223
  Atery, ii. 418
  Athanasian Creed, i. 252
  Athelstan, Bishop of Cornwall, his see, iii. 415. His successors
    ibid.
  ―――― the 2nd Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  ―――― King, i. 139, 240――ii. 59, 60, 61, 69, 158――iii. 277, 278
    _bis_, 322 _bis_, 430, 433, 462――iv. 40. Separated Devon from
    Cornwall 104
  Athenodorus, St. History of, i. 386, 388
  Atlantic Ocean, i. 388――ii. 283――iii. 98, 426, 429, 430
  Attall Saracen, i. 414
  Attica, iv. 161
  Atticus, a Greek geographer, ii. 172
  Attornies, Cornish, ii. 253
  Atwell, Rev. Hugh, i. 421.――John, ii. 189
  Auburne, Nicholas, ii. 189
  Aubyn, St., family, i. 32, 93――iv. 54, _see Seynt Aubyn_
  Audley, James Touchet, Lord, i. 86, beheaded 87
  Augmentation office, ii. 412, 425――iii. 286, 293――iv. 113.――Copy
    from, ii. 429. Roll preserved in 87
  Augo, William de, Archdeacon of Cornwall, ii. 426
  Augustine, i. 410
  ―――― St. i. 312.――Relates miracles of St. Hilary, ii. 169
  ―――― black monks of, iii. 111
  ―――― bull, iv. 100
  ―――― canons, i. 27, 73 _bis_――iii. 456. College of in St. Colomb
    141. Priory of 458
  ―――― friars, i. 83
  Augustinum, iv. 117, or Autun 121
  Augustus, Emperor, i. 386
  ―――― title of, assumed by the Emperor Charles VIII. 369
  Auld Lang Syne, iii. 298
  Aulerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  ―――― Branovices, ib.
  ―――― Cenomanni, now Mans, ib.
  ―――― Diablentres, ib.
  ―――― Eburorices, in Normandy, ib.
  Auncell, Richard, ii. 209
  Aurelian, Emperor, i. 214 _bis_, 236, 388
  Aurivale, ii. 428
  Austell, William de, and his arms, i. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 52 _bis_, 59, 106, 128, 152, 416, 418, 423――ii.
    314――iii. 47, 55, 58 _bis_, 198, 253, 391, 394, 395, 450, 455――iv.
    54, 104, 110
  AUSTELL, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    etymology, history of church, patronage, incumbent, i. 41.
    Impropriation, value of Benefice, land tax, divisions, Treverbyn
    42. Penrice, Menagwins 43. Roseundle, Roscorla, Trenaran, Merther,
    story of Mr. Laa 44. Hawkins family, Towington, Upcott family 45.
    By Norden, Polruddon. By Tonkin, Tewington 46. Pentwan, Pelniddon,
    Trenorren. By the Editor, rise owing to mines and china clay 47.
    Villages, church and tower, font, almshouse 48. Antiquities,
    statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 49. Elvan courses,
    streamworks 50
  Austell, St. river, i. 47
  ―――― town, i. 41, 45, 48――ii. 47――iii. 121, 190, 195, 196.――Market
    and fairs, i. 42. Formerly a village, great road through, export,
    harbour at Seaporth 47. Railroad finished 1832, 48.――Road to Fowey
    from, iv. 109
  Austelles, St. by Leland, iv. 274
  Austen, J. T. representative of the Treffrye family, a spirited and
    judicious miner, ii. 46
  ―――― place in Fowey, J. T. iii. 348 _bis_.
  Austin canons, cell of in Lancell’s parish, ii. 415 _bis_.
  ―――― St. iii. 167, 284, 285.――Bishop of Rochester, ii. 279, 287, 288
    _bis_.
  ―――― Abbey, Canterbury, iii. 114, 115
  Austol’s, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Austria, Leopold Archduke of, made Richard 1st prisoner, ii. 178
  Auvergne, ii. 86
  Auxerre, diocese of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. Amator, Bishop of, ii. 73 _bis_.
  ―――― St. German, Bishop of, ii. 63, 64
  ―――― oratory of St. Morice at, ii. 75
  Auxona, R. ii. 64
  Avalde, i. 407
  Avallon, i. 337 _bis_.
  Avant, i. 223
  Ave, etymology, i. 182
  Ave-Mary lane, ib.
  Avery family, i. 204 _bis_, 224.――Captain, a celebrated buccaneer,
    supposed to have buried treasure, ii. 128.――Mr. iii. 235
    _bis_.――William, iv. 77
  Avoh beacon, iii. 394, 401
  Avon river, in Somersetshire, ii. 292, 293
  Avranches, Augustine, Bishop of, ii. 208
  Axceolanum, or Hexham, the see of, iv. 42
  Axminster, i. 328
  ―――― hundred, iv. 15
  Aylesbury, i. 258
  Ayleworth, Captain, iii. 183
  Ayre, St. iii. 55
  Ayscough, Sir George, his engagement with the Dutch, ii. 25.
    Entertained at Le Feock by Captain Penrose 26. Sailed to the Sound 27
  Ayscough’s Catalogue, iii. 154
  Ayssheby, ii. 430

  Babb of Tingraze, Devon, iv. 95
  Babylon, iii. 434
  Babylonish captivity, iii. 69
  Bacchus and Sergius, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iv. 99, 105. Their
    history 100
  Bacon, Lord Chancellor, i. 340. His History of Henry VII. 87
  ―――― Sir Nicholas, Lord Chancellor, married a daughter of Sir
    Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Badcock, Henry, iii. 86 _bis_. Rev. Henry 117. Margery and Mrs. 86
  Badgall village, ii. 377
  Bagg, James, iii. 358
  Bagge, Fisart, a sea captain, ii. 36. Sir James, of Plymouth 13
  Bagwell, i. 209, 407
  Baines, Mr. ii. 124.――Captain, iii. 91
  Bake, ii. 76. Account of 67
  Baker, Nicholas, ii. 423.――The Chronicler, iii. 163, 182.――His
    Chronicle, ii. 60, 182, 342――iii. 144.――Family, iv. 109
  Baldue mine, account of, ii. 309
  Baldwin of Colquite, arms of, iii. 66
  ―――― Exceter, iv. 111
  Bale, i. 295――iii. 277――iv. 111, 145.――His writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Balfour, Sir William, iv. 188
  Baliol College, Oxford, i. 318 _bis_――ii. 147――iii. 97, 344
  Ballachise, iv. 146
  Balls, Mary, ii. 365. Mary, wife of Theodore Paleolagus 372.
    William, her father ib. William 365. No traces of the family
    remaining 372
  Baltic sea, iv. 21
  Bampfield, ii. 293
  Banbury, Richard, iii. 382
  ―――― borough, Mr. Praed, M.P. for, iii. 10
  Banda, in the East Indies, capture of, ii. 216
  Bandy, Rev. Daniel, of Warleggon, iv. 129
  Banfield, Mr. iii. 125
  Bangor, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― monastery, i. 289
  Bankes, Anne, F. and Henry, iii. 220
  Bant, William, iii. 42
  Baptist, St. John, iii. 82
  Baragwaneth, John, iv. 55
  Barbadoes, iii. 183.――Colonel Kendall, governor of, iv. 23
  Barbiague, i. 153
  Bards, druidical, i. 192
  ―――― verses on Arthur’s sepulchre, i. 337
  Barham, Dr. iii. 11, 100
  Baring, Alexander, i. 151――ii. 314
  Barnet heath, anecdote of the battle of, ii. 182
  Barnewell, George, iii. 102
  Barnstaple, iv. 107
  Baron, family, Jasper, Mr. iii. 377
  Baron of Lestwithiel, Mr. iii. 24
  ―――― of Trelynike, Christopher, i. 379
  Baronius, i. 206, 214.――His agonal, iii. 434
  Barret family, John, ii. 89. Roger 192. Mr. and arms 89
  Barrett, Mr. ii. 89
  Barrow, an ancient, i. 187
  ―――― John, ii. 192
  Barrows, the five, iv. 32
  Barry, ii. 119 _bis_.
  Bartholomew hospital cased with Bath stone, i. 58
  Bartholomew, “De Propriet. Rerum,” i. 163
  ―――― St. his feast, ii. 220――iii. 324.――Act of Uniformity to be
    professed before, ii. 220. Two thousand clergy deprived of their
    benefices upon, in 1662, 307
  Bartine castle, i. 230
  Barton, etymology of, ii. 152, 153
  ―――― Charles, iii. 154
  Basil, Emperor, his menology, ii. 36
  ―――― St. his Sermon in praise of St. Julyot, ii. 274
  Basill, account of, i. 198. Etymology 199
  Basingstoke hundred, ii. 208
  ―――― manor, ii. 208
  Baskeville, i. 206
  Basset, i. 160, 266. Sir Francis 114.――Francis, ii. 413. Sir
    Francis, ordered to defend St. Michael’s mount, the mount granted
    to him 213. His cup, given to the corporation of St. Ives 259,
    271. Thomas, William 428.――Richard, iv. 28. Sir Thomas 187
  Basset of Pencoose, William, i. 391
  ―――― Trewhele, John, i. 391
  ―――― of Tyhiddy, Sir Francis, i. 163 _ter._ John 86. J. P.
    259.――Family, ii. 199, 234, 235, 238 _bis_, 239, 241, 242. Hon.
    Frances 250. Francis 98, 235, 242 _bis_, 243 _ter._ Sir Francis
    235 _ter._, 236, 243 _bis_, 245, 246, 247, 248 _ter._ Baron 249.
    George 239. John 188, 235 _ter._, 243. John P 239, 242, 244. Sir
    John 239. Lady 240. Lucy 243. William 235 _bis_. Mr. 236. Rev. Mr.
    234. Mrs. 242. Arms 239.――Francis, iii. 38 _ter._, 229, 381, 445.
    Francis, Lord De Dunstanville 239, 271. John 239. J. P. 380.
    Margaret 445. William 381. Lady 390. Miss 8. Mr. 133, 381 _bis_.
    Seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Mrs. heir of the Pendarves family 303.
    Family 384, 390.――John, iv. 152, 154 _bis_. Family 154
  ―――― Umberleigh, i. 368.――Sir John, ii. 239
  ―――― signature to Magna Charta, ii. 242
  Bassett, ii. 176
  Bastard, i. 319. Sir William 319. Arms 320
  Baswedneck manor, iv. 166
  Bate, Sarah, i. 355
  Bath, i. 56――ii. 215, 295――iii. 123, 252
  ―――― Battle of Lansdowne, near, ii. 349
  ―――― John, Earl of, i. 104.――Earl of, governor of Pendennis castle,
    ii. 14. John, Earl of 6. Bought St. Mawe’s castle 277. Sir John
    Grenville, created Earl of 345. John Grenville, Earl of 339, 340.
    His iniquitous proceedings to recover property sold by his father
    333. Earls of 340
  ―――― three brothers named, iv. 3
  ―――― oolite, a house at Truro, built of, ii. 33
  ―――― and Wells, Thomas Ken, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  ―――― stone transported to Truro and London, and St. Bartholomew
    hospital cased with, i. 58
  Bathsheba, i. 329
  Bathurst, Allen and Jane, iii. 249
  Batten, John, character of, and of Rev. J. H. iii. 95. Family 94 and 95
  Battin, account of, ii. 227
  ―――― of Battin family, Miss, ii. 227
  Battle Abbey Roll, iii. 142
  ―――― deanery of, i. 147
  Bauden, i. 247, 397
  ―――― of Gudden, Reginald, strange story of, ii. 300
  Baudree, i. 243
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 182
  Bavi, in Italy, iv. 172
  Bawden, i. 8――ii. 316
  ―――― of Looe, Mr. iv. 32
  Bawdry, Rev. Daniel, of Quethiock and Worlegan, iii. 372
  Baxter, etymology of, iv. 8 _quin._
  Bay of Biscay, ii. 246
  Bayley, Rev. J. vicar of St. Mervyn, iii. 179
  Bayliff family, ii. 259, 260
  ―――― of Blackmore, iii. 213
  Bayton parish, iii. 118
  Beachey head, iii. 10. High water at 98
  Beacon, a Danish intrenchment, ii. 56
  ―――― etymology and purpose of, iii. 394
  Beale, Matthew, i. 2――iv. 44
  ―――― of St. Teath, i. 2
  Bealtine, in Cornwall, fires on May day, in honour of the sun, iv. 8
  Bear, i. 224
  ―――― Grace, William, ii. 396
  Beare, Mr. ii. 261.――Thomas, iv. 22. William 22 _bis_. Miss, Mr. and
    arms 22
  ―――― of Killigarth, iv. 161
  ―――― Trenarall, George, and his arms, i. 405
  Bearford, ii. 256
  Beauchamp family, ii. 130 _quat._ Guy 130. John 123, 133. Joseph
    133. Stephen 130. William 130 _bis_. Arms 130.――Lord, and his
    nephew, iv. 186
  ―――― monument at Gwennap, ii. 135
  ―――― of Bletsho, ii. 130
  ―――― of Chyton, Luke and Peter, iii. 315
  ―――― of Hatch, ii. 130
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, arms, ii. 130
  ―――― of Trevince, Peter, iii. 303
  Beauford, John, i. 216
  ―――― of Lantegles, i. 105
  ―――― James, i. 222
  ―――― John, Duke of Somerset, John his father, and Margaret, iii. 65
  Beaulieu or Bewley abbey, Hants, ii. 190, 191, 327. King John’s
    reasons for founding it, Latin 327. English 328. Afforded
    sanctuary to Queen Margaret and Perkin Warbeck 329
  Beaumont, ii. 119 _bis_. William 195. William Lord 185.――Mrs.
    Dorothy and her daughter, iii. 38
  Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Beavill of Guarnack or Killygarth, ii. 332 _bis_.
  Becagh, Thomas, iv. 146
  Becanus, Goropius, i. 192
  Becher, the introducer of reverberatory furnaces, iii. 343
  Becker, i. 366
  Becket, St. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 177.――His day
    177, 179. His death 177. His church in St. Mervyn 177. One of his
    murderers 246
  ―――― of Curturtholl, iii. 170 _bis_. Arms 170
  Bedack or Bessake manor, account of, ii. 353, 354 _bis_.
  Beddoes, Dr. iii. 94. His life, chemical experiments, and character 251
  Bede, the Venerable, iii. 167, 364――iv. 42, 43.――Has preserved a
    letter of Pope Gregory in his Ecclesiastical History, ii. 288
  Bedeverus, i. 335
  Bedford, i. 294――ii. 76
  ―――― Earl of, i. 65. Francis Russell, Earl of 65. Duke of 26
  ―――― Daniel, ii. 160.――Rev. Mr. 276. Miss, iii. 196.――Rev. John of
    St. Wenn, iv. 137, 140
  Bedfordshire, i. 369――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. The Cornwalls 22
    times sheriffs of 449
  Bedingfield, Sir Robert, iii. 140
  Bedoke or Besake in Lasake, iii. 359
  Beel arms, ii. 252
  Beer, Mr. ii. 259
  Beere, Mr. iii. 65
  Bees, St. in Cumberland, iii. 158
  Beiltine in Ireland, _see Bealtine_
  Belfour, i. 113
  Belimaur, father of Cassibelan, i. 10
  Bell rock, near the Forth, lighthouse upon, iii. 378
  Belloprato, Rodolphus de, ii. 107
  Bellot, i. 301, 302. Anne, Christopher 349. Francis 356. Renatus 302,
    303. Arms 302.――Rev. Mr. of Maddern, iii. 78. Family 423
  ―――― of Bochim, i. 357. Of Bochym 356――ii. 227
  Bells, ceremony of christening, iii. 210
  Benalleck chapel, i. 242
  Benedict’s, St. monks, i. 73
  Benedictine abbey, ii. 81
  ―――― monastery, i. 341
  ―――― monks, iv. 25.――Priory of, on St. Michael’s mount, ii. 174,
    176.――Walter de Exeter said to be one, iv. 111
  ―――― nuns, i. 73, 176.――Monastery of, in France, iii. 141
  ―――― rule, iv. 100
  Benedictines, priory of, at West Conworthy, iii. 103
  Benedictus Abbas, i. 96
  Benett’s, barton, iv. 152, 154
  ―――― St. in Lanyvet, iii. 111
  Bengal, iii. 188
  Benham, Lord, i. 124
  Beni, i. 77
  Benin, bight of, iv. 90
  Bennet, Rev. Joseph, ii. 338. His father 339. Richard 192.――R. G.
    iii. 274.――Adam and Anne, iv. 75. Rev. John 40
  ―――― of Renton, Devon, John, iv. 75 _ter._
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Edward, iii. 2 _bis_, 3; Honor and Richard 3.
    Family 2. Arms 3
  ―――― St. Monastery in Lanivet, ii. 338 _bis_. Interesting remains,
    history involved in obscurity, attached to Bodmin priory 386. Made
    defence in civil war, modern vicissitudes 387.――Pider, an alien
    priory, iv. 101
  Bennett, i. 276――ii. 212
  ―――― George, ii. 377
  Benthamia passifera, iv. 181
  Bere, George, i. 406
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 406
  ―――― Alston, Devon, ii. 118
  Berengarius of Angiers, i. 110, 111
  Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  ―――― St. Winnox or Winoe, iv. 157
  Beriman, George, iv. 55
  Berimus, St., Bishop of Dorchester, ii. 60
  Berkeley, James Lord, i. 313.――Charles, Viscount Falmouth, ii. 11.
    Lord Berkeley of Stratton 23, 117. Sophia, his daughter 23, 117.
    Viscount Falmouth’s arms 11. Barbara, iii. 201. Thomas, Lord 163.
    William, Lord B. of Stratton 201. Judge 144. Family 90.――Sir John,
    iv. 14 _quat._ Lord Berkeley of Stratton, and arms 14. Family, ii.
    192――iv. 139
  Berkley, of Bruton, Somersetshire, Sir Maurice, iv. 14
  Berkshire, ii. 139
  Bernard, i. 410
  ―――― St. ii. 225
  Bernard of Bodmin, Benedict and John, iii. 324
  Bernevas, iv. 160
  Berriman, Henry, i. 273, 276
  Berry, John, ii. 196
  ―――― court, Barton, account of, ii. 232
  ―――― park, iv. 31 _bis_, 32
  Berrycomb, i. 93
  Berryhill, i. 93
  Bertin, St. Abbot of Sithian, iv. 157
  Berwick, ii. 76
  ―――― John de, iii. 2
  Berwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60
  Bespalfan chapel, i. 225
  Best, i. 391
  ―――― of St. Wenn, Edward, his booty at Penzance, iii. 82
  Betenson, family and arms, iii. 23
  Betham, Sir William, iv. 144
  Bethsaida, St. Andrew born at, iv. 100
  Bettesworth, John, LL.D. and John, iii. 205
  ―――― of Clithurst, Thomas, iii. 206
  ―――― of Fyning, in Rogate parish, Sussex, Thomas, iii. 205. Family
    206. Nine descents 205
  Bettison, Richard, iii. 358
  Beverley, i. 141
  Bevill, John, i. 406. Sir Richard 16. John 17. Descent of the family
    16. Arms 17.――Elizabeth, iv. 22, 162. John 22. Peter, Philip, and
    Sir William 22, 162. Arms 22, 72
  ―――― of Gwarnack family, iv. 22, 162
  ―――― family, monument to one of them, iv. 36
  ―――― of Killigarth, in Talland, ii. 343
  Bewes of Carnedon, Thomas, iii. 459
  Beyworthye, ii. 430
  Bicketon, account of, i. 410
  Bickford, i. 223, 349
  ―――― of Deansland, Devon, Arscott, iv. 130
  Bickton, account of, i. 412
  ―――― of Bickton, arms, i. 412
  Biddulph, Sir Theophilus, of Westcombe, Kent, iii. 162
  Bideford, ii. 221
  ―――― bridge, erection of, ii. 341
  Bigberry of Bigberry, Sir William, i. 346
  Bignonia grandiflora, iv. 181
  Bikesleya, Osbert, ii. 427
  Billett, ii. 212
  ―――― Rev. Mr. iii. 171
  Billing of Hengar, family and heir of, iv. 94, 95. Gentlemen of
    blood and arms, their marriages and arms, Tredinick gave the same,
    iv. 95
  Billinge, Sir Richard, iii. 140. Richard 141, 150
  Bilson, iii. 206
  Bindon or Bindown hill, iii. 250, 253――iv. 32
  Binerton, ii. 260
  Binks, Philip, ii. 189
  Binmerton, chapel at, i. 288
  Binony manor, iv. 16 _bis_.
  Biny, i. 329
  Birch of Pembrokeshire, Sir Robert, and his daughter, iii. 326
  Bird, Mr. monument to, and Mr. of Devon, iii. 426
  Birge, Berty, i. 149
  Birkhead, Mr. i. 8
  Birne, Patrick, iv. 146
  Birthdays, celebration of, ii. 228
  Bishop, Rev. Mr. i. 224. Family 213.――Rev. Mr. ii. 130.――Mr.
    memoir of, iii. 143
  Bishop’s book, iii. 380
  ―――― jurisdiction, Temple parish lies out of, iv. 149
  ―――― Tawter, iii. 415
  Bishops, committal of seven to the Tower, iii. 297, 298. Feelings
    excited by it 298. List of their names 299. Song on the subject 298
  Blacaler, John, ii. 195
  Black, Ensign, i. 267, 275
  ―――― Book of the Archbishops of Dublin, iv. 146
  ―――― canons, i. 73 _ter._
  ―――― friars mendicant, i. 83
  ―――― Haye, iv. 161
  Black jack, ii. 310
  ―――― monks, iii. 232
  ―――― prince, ii. 155, 176――iii. 239
  ―――― rock, ii. 1, 2
  ―――― island, iv. 72, 230
  Blackburn, i. 153
  Blackheath, Kent, iii. 388.――Rebel camp at, i. 87
  Blackston, i. 109. Of London 204
  Blake family, ii. 362. General 26. His defeat of Van Tromp and De
    Witt, and his own defeat by Van Tromp 25. Entertained by Captain
    Penrose, illiterate 26. His origin 27
  Blake of Ford castle, Northumberland, Anne, and Sir Francis, iii.
    200, 201
  Blakiston, Sir M. Bart., iii. 138
  Blanchard manor, ii. 304. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 302.
    Tin-mines in 302
  Blandinberg, ii. 127
  Blase, St. by Leland, iv. 275
  ―――― St. church, iii. 372 _bis_.
  Blatchford, Mr. iii. 14
  Blathwayte, i. 221. William 221
  Blayble farm, ii. 256
  Blaze, St. i. 41
  ―――― History of, by Hals, i. 52. By the Editor, Patron of cloth
    manufacture 55, and of Ragusa 55. His feast 53
  Blazey, St. bay, iv. 124
  ―――― bridge, i. 60――iii. 57, 59
  ―――― highway, i. 56
  ―――― parish, i. 41, 152――ii. 314, 393, 398――iii. 55, 58 ――iv. 99
  BLAZEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint’s history, i.
    52. Fair, Rosilian, principal inhabitants 53. By Tonkin, Roselian,
    Trenawick, Trengreene 54. By the Editor, saint’s history,
    broadcloth manufacture 55. Birthplace of Ralph Allen, Esq., his
    history 56. Statistics and Geology by Dr. Boase 59
  Blekennock town, iv. 229
  Blencowe, Mr. Justice, iii. 417
  Bletius, Prince of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Blewet of Colon, Miss, and arms, iv. 95, _see Bluet_
  ―――― of Cornwall, i. 210. Colon 210. Robert 210 _bis_. Arms 210
  ―――― of Hampshire, arms, i. 210
  Blewet of Holcomb Rogus, i. 210
  Blewett, George, iv. 214, 215 _bis_. John 215, 216. Mr. 216, 219.
    His large property 219. Family monuments 219
  Blewett of Marazion, George, ii. 83
  Bligh, John, i. 216. Family 78, 396.――Captain William, of the
    Bounty, iv. 45. Family 139
  ―――― of Botadon, i. 237
  ―――― of Botathon, William, ii. 304
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Blissland, i. 103, 129, 167, 174――ii. 56, 151
  ―――― church, robbery of, i. 61
  ―――― manor, jurisdiction and possessors, i. 61
  ―――― parish (or Bliston) in Trigshire, iii. 125, 224――iv. 48, 49, 50
  BLISSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 60.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, ancient state,
    jurisdiction of manor, possessors, tin-mines 61. By Tonkin,
    etymology 61. By the Editor, statistics, two incumbents in 115
    years, Geology 62
  Blockhead, ii. 331
  Bloflemmen parish, iii. 463
  Blois of Penryn, John, Roger, and family, iii. 62
  Bloughan Pille, by Leland, iv. 277
  Blount, Elizabeth, i. 64
  Blount’s Tenures, i. 153――iii. 442――iv. 7
  Bloyse, Mr. ii. 97
  Bluet, Edward, i. 316
  ―――― of Little Colan, Colan, iii. 318. Elizabeth 319. Richard 318
    _bis_, 319
  Bluett, Mrs. i. 315.――Mr. ii. 375――Rev. T. L. of Mullion, iii. 258
  Bluisdale, St. Patrick born at, ii. 65
  Boaden, ii. 130
  Boar of Cornwall, i. 333
  Boase, Dr. ii. 340, 352.――Mr. iii. 95. Dr. H. S. secretary to the
    Geological Society 95, 100, 110 _bis_, 118. His Geology of
    Cornwall 371. Family 94
  Boats with paddle wheels, iv. 17
  Bocarne, i. 369. Etymology 85
  Bocconia cordata, iv. 181
  Bochym, i. 356. Account of 301, 303
  ―――― arms, ii. 131
  ―――― of Bochym, John, i. 301. Arms 302.――Robert, ii. 192
  ―――― in Cury, ii. 139
  Boconnoc, i. 112 _bis_, 113
  ―――― downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 186, 188
  ―――― parish, ii. 397――iii. 347――iv. 159, 184.――Living of, iii. 67, 451
  ―――― or Boconnock manor, iii. 437.――By Hals, possessors from Edward
    III., i. 63. By Tonkin, etymology 67. By the Editor, finest seat
    in Cornwall, and description 68. Governor Pitt’s purchase of 68
  BOCONNOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    antiquity as a manor, no endowed church 1294, patronage, land tax,
    i. 63. Statistics, poor rate, and Geology 72
  Bocunyan, ii. 151
  Bodanan tenement, iv. 43
  Bodcuike, iii. 449
  Boddenham, i. 91
  Bodecastle, iii. 233
  Bodenek, and trajectus, by Leland, iv. 279, 280, 290
  Bodenick, ii. 411. Account of 410
  Bodeworgy, i. 213
  Bodilly Vean, ii. 137
  ―――― Veor, ii. 137
  Bodleat castle, iv. 229
  Bodley, John, ii. 196
  Bodman or Bodmin bishopric, i. 73――ii. 95.――Bishop of, i. 231,
    250――ii. 299――iv. 116
  ―――― borough, i. 367, 368――iv. 46.――Boyer, mayor of, ii. 198. George
    Hunt, M.P. for 381.――William Peter, M.P. for, iii. 333. S. T.
    Spry, M.P. for, ii. 35――iii. 446
  ―――― Martin, Canon of, i. 97, 98
  ―――― church of St. Peter at, i. 74, 76. Steeple 75
  ―――― downs, ii. 187
  ―――― manor, iii. 238. With Keyland in Bodman and Lostwithiel
    parishes 359
  ―――― market, iii. 16
  ―――― parish, i. 133, 167, 174――ii. 60, 379, 384――iii. 58
  BODMIN parish, situation, boundaries, ancient name, etymology, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, school-house, secular
    church, now in ruins, i. 76. Bonehouse, British entrenchment 77.
    Court leet, Crown rent 78. Franciscan friary of St. Nicholas, to
    what uses converted 79. Its font, founder, his history 80.
    Miracles 82. History of the order 82. Lancar 83. Suicide of Mr.
    Mount Stephens 84. Bocarne 85. Flammock’s rebellion 86. Bodmin,
    the rendezvous of Perkin Warbeck’s forces, and of Arundell’s
    rebels 88. By Tonkin, etymology 91. By Whitaker, church, school
    91. Market, Grey Friars, bones found there 92. Chapels and
    almshouses of St. Anthony and St. George 93. Priory church, and
    Vivian’s tomb 94. By the Editor, church and monastery of St.
    Petroc 95. Histories by Whitaker and Wallis, story from Benedictus
    Abbas 96. Translated 98. By Wallis, benefice and patron,
    dimensions and history of church, destroyed by lightning,
    pinnacles dangerous, chapel of St. Thomas, tower at Berry, church
    and churchyard 100. Prior Vivian’s tomb, donation of organ. By the
    Editor, carving in the church 101. Painted window, statistics, and
    Geology 102
  ―――― priory of St. Peter or St. Petroc, i. 73, 116, 232――ii. 332,
    382, 386――iii. 24, 238, 277, 279――iv. 137, 162.――Dissolved its
    property and royalty, i. 74.――Documents relating to, Appendix XI.
    iv. 337.――House, i. 74
  ―――― Prior of, i. 74, 230, 231 _ter._, 246, 250, 289, 294, 371, 373,
    405――ii. 62, 151――iii. 175, 237, 279――iv. 137, 138, 160.――Roger, i.
    97, 98. List of priors 75.――Thomas Vivian, iii. 279
  ―――― races, ii. 35
  ―――― railroad to, from Wade bridge, i. 376
  ―――― road, ii. 390
  ―――― stone, iii. 21
  ―――― town, ii. 51, 151, 154 _bis_, 187, 188 _bis_, 192, 193 _bis_,
    195――iii. 26, 189, 278――iv. 187.――Erected into a coinage town,
    wholesale market, borough writs, principal inhabitants, precept
    for elections, i. 78. Importance, weekly market, fairs, number of
    churches 79. Decay 93. Record and council rooms, floor giving way
    100. Discovery of records 101.――Burnt by the Danes, ii. 60. County
    gaol built at 431. Two brothers left for London to seek their
    fortunes 34. John Robarts, Viscount of 379. Robert Robarts,
    Viscount of 379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles II. 380.――A Bishop’s
    see, iii. 408. See transferred there 267. Bishop of 456. St.
    Petroc’s church in 277. Monastery at 278
  Bodmyn by Leland, iv. 261
  Bodregen of Trengreene, i. 55
  Bodrigan, Sir Henry, i. 417, 418, 421
  ―――― family, ii. 106, 114. Variances with the Haleps 109. Arms 107.
    Sir Henry 115, 317. His escape from Bosworth field, and wonderful
    leap, Sir Richard Edgecumbe’s escape from him 108. His history by
    the Editor, his property divided between Edgecumbe and Trevanian,
    attacked near his own house 115. His manor of Newton given to
    Trevanian 318. Isabel 398. Otho 107 _quat._ William 398. Arms of
    William 107.――Sir Henry, iii. 294. Mr. 393. Family 190, 203, 293.
    Struggle with the Edgecumbes for each other’s property, lost
    theirs at Bosworth 204.――Family, iv. 21, 71
  ―――― de, family, monument to, iii. 292
  ―――― of Restronget, Wm. de, and family, attainted, iii. 226
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 106, 114
  ―――― leap, ii. 108
  Bodrigge in Kellark, ii. 143
  Bodrigy, account of, ii. 343
  Bodrugan, Henry de, family, ii. 363.――Arms, iii. 119
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 274
  Bodrugons, ii. 100
  Bodville, Charles, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Bodwanick village, ii. 355
  Body, Mr. ii. 192
  Boerhaave, iii. 49
  Boggan, Zacharias, Mayor of Totness, his arms, ii. 320
  Boggans, ii. 320
  Bohelland farm, story of a melancholy and dreadful murder at, ii. 100
  Bohemia, John of Luxemburg, King of, ii. 72
  Bohun, Humphrey de, Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Margaret, i. 63
  Bohurra manor, ii. 276――iii. 209
  Boia, i. 107
  Boii, i. 107
  Bojil village, ii. 81
  Bokelby in St. Kew, iii. 61
  Bokelly, account of, ii. 335
  Bokiddick village, ii. 385
  Bolerium, supposed to be Land’s End, ii. 21
  ―――― cove, iii. 259
  Boligh family, John, ii. 398. William 398
  Bolitho, Messrs. ii. 125.――Family, iv. 67
  Bollandists, iii. 33
  Bolleit, i. 141. Geoffrey de 142
  Bolton, Duke of, ii. 257, 363――iii. 46, 118. Henry the last Duke
    47.――His heirs, iv. 58
  Bolytho, Alexander, ii. 160
  Bombay, iii. 188
  Bonaventure, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82. His Hymns 82. His Life of St.
    Francis 81
  ―――― Thomasine, her history, name, birth, iv. 132. Went to London,
    married her master, a rich widow twice 133. Thirdly, her death,
    founded many works of piety and charity 134
  Bond, ii. 256――iii. 246 _bis_, 250 _ter._, 252, 293, 378――iv. 25,
    37, 38.――His History of Looe, iii. 378.――His Topographical
    Sketches, i. 178, 321――ii. 295 _ter._――iii. 45, 120, 121――iv.
    25.――Henry, i. 383
  ―――― of earth, ii. 101
  ―――― of Looe, Thomas, iii. 348
  Bone, Richard, ii. 353 _bis_, 354. Arms 353.――Family, iv. 161 _bis_.
  Bonealvy, ii. 430
  Boniface, his life, iv. 126. The name 127
  ―――― Pope, ii. 288
  Bonifant, John, ii. 189
  Bonithan of Kertleowe, Alice, iv. 107
  Bonithon of Bonithon, Jane, iii. 225, 228. Her character 225.
    Richard 225, and Richard 225 _bis_. Simon 225 _bis_. Family arms
    226 _bis_. Monument at Milor 228
  ―――― James, of Grampound, iii. 229
  Bonvill, ii. 71, 292
  ―――― of Killygarth, ii. 341
  Bonville, Sir William, Lord Bonville, iii. 294, 295, 350 _ter._
    Taken at the battle of St. Alban’s and beheaded 294. Sir William
    his son, and William his grandson, Lord Harrington, both killed at
    the battle of Wakefield 294.――Family, iv. 107
  Bonython, account of, i. 302. Etymology 303
  ―――― family, i. 125.――Charles, ii. 120. Family took the name of
    Carclew 337.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Bonython, i. 302. Charles, M.P. 302 _bis_. His suicide 303.
    John 302. John, Dr. John 303. Richard, his suicide, Roskymer 303.
    Thomas, arms 302
  ―――― of Carclew, i. 143, 302
  ―――― John, Richard, and the heiress, iii. 303
  Booth, John, Bishop of Exon, i. 218.――Henry, ii. 196
  Bordeny abbey, i. 200
  Borel, i. 192
  Borew, account of, i. 420
  Borlase, i. 16, 141 _bis_, 198, 398 _quater_.
  ―――― Dr. historian of Cornwall, i. 180, 184, 228 _bis_, 229 _quat._,
    341, 360 _bis_――iii. 84, 89, 137, 196, 244, 309 _bis_, 323, 324,
    329 _bis_, 340, 366 _bis_――iv. 29, 30, 31, 175. Rev. William,
    LL.D. ii. 218, 219, 285, 361. Vicar of St. Just 386
    _ter._――Biographical notices of, iii. 51.――His Antiquities, ii.
    285, 424――iii. 31, 80, 89, 244, 365, 386. His Collections 373. His
    diploma 50. His speculations on the Druids 31. His estimation
    among his countrymen 408. His MSS. 232. His Natural History of
    Cornwall 329, 366, 386. Pope’s letter to him 53. His works 49, 52.
    Their effects 49. His death 54. His sons 53, 54. His son 196.――His
    account of a Celtic superstition, ii. 206, and of St. Kebius
    338.――His Map, iv. 24. His Natural History 30
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 398. John 59. Nicholas 398. James 18. Arms
    18.――Ann, ii. 218 _bis_. Rev. Geo. 219. J. B. 218. Rev. Walter
    218. LL.D. 302. Vice-warden of the Stannaries 285. Rev. Mr. 299.
    Family 282, 285, 286.――Humphrey, iii. 317. Nicholas 358. Samuel
    88, 90. Dr. Walter 54. Vicar of Madden 82. His biography 84. Built
    the house at Castle Hornech 84. Dr. William, Rector of Ludgvan 49.
    Family 83, 88, 90, 94. Arms 84.――Family, iv. 141
  Borlase of Borlase in St. Wenn, ii. 282
  ―――― of Newland, ii. 282
  ―――― of Pendene, John, ii. 282. John, M. P. 285. Arms 282. Of
    Pendeen in St. Just, John father of the two doctors, iii. 84, 88
  ―――― of Sythney, ii. 282
  ―――― of Treludderin, Nicholas, i. 199
  ―――― of Treludra, i. 20, 397 _bis_.
  ―――― of Treludrow, Humphrey, iii. 238, 268. Memoir of 268. Family
    property 271 _bis_.
  ―――― manor, iv. 140
  ―――― Pippin, iii. 268――iv. 141
  ―――― Varth manor, iv. 139
  Borough system, i. 389
  Borthy, i. 386 _bis_. Ralph de 386
  Bosawsen, iii. 322
  Boscastel, by Leland, iv. 257
  Boscastle, iii. 234
  ―――― harbour, ii. 50
  Boscawen, Admiral, i. 148. Edward 384. Hugh 58. Hugh, Hugh 297. Hugh
    Viscount Falmouth 141. Right Honourable Hugh 294. John de,
    Lawrence 140. Nicholas 113. William 297. Arms 140. Family 145,
    386. Admiral, ii. 285. Bridget 68. Hugh 68. Hugh kept a school 32.
    Hugh created Viscount Falmouth 11. Right Hon. Hugh 277. P. C. to
    William, III. 54. Family 136, 255, 303, 304, 357.――Hugh, iv. 77.
    Colonel Nicholas 188. Family 1 _bis_
  ―――― of Boscawen Rose, i. 254. Lawrence 254.――St. Burian, fam. iii.
    213. Their marriages 213, 216
  ―――― of Nansavallen, Charles, ii. 299. Charles, M.P. 303
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Bridget, Hugh, i. 205. Hugh 249. Hugh 384. Hugh
    395, 396. Hugh, ii. 137. Right Hon. Hugh 299, 302, 303 _bis_. John
    302. Nicholas 304.――Bridget and her great dowry, iii. 216. Admiral
    Edward, memoir of 218. Elected for Cornwall 219. Edward, his death
    219. Edward Earl of Falmouth 220. Has rebuilt the house at
    Tregothnan 221. Lord Boscawen Rose took the first class degree at
    Oxford 221. G. E. third Viscount 220. Hugh 209, 212, 213 _ter._,
    214, 215, 236, 397, 464 _bis_. Hugh 216. Supported Wm. III. 216.
    Arrested James’s adherents 217. Raised to the peerage 217. V.
    Falmouth 397. Hugh, second Viscount, and his character 217.
    Nicholas 213. Colonel Nicholas, in the rebel army 183. Richard
    213. W. G., his death 219. Dr. Walcot’s verses on 220. Family 61,
    208, 258, 305, 419. Antiquity 215, name 215, obtained Tregothnan
    215. Benefactors of their neighbourhood, their part in the Civil
    War and in the Revolution 216. Family 305, 419
  ―――― of Trevellick, i. 254
  ―――― downs, i. 141
  ―――― Ros, i. 140. Etymology and possessors 145.――Rose, in St.
    Burian, iii. 215
  ―――― Rose, Lord, son of the Earl of Falmouth, iii. 221
  ―――― Un, i. 141 _bis_
  Bosence, account of, i. 360
  Bosinney borough, iv. 20
  Bosistow, account of, iii. 35
  ―――― Mr. of Treadreath, family and arms, iii. 35
  Bosithney, i. 323 _ter._
  Boskednan, i. 141
  Boskenna, i. 148 _bis_
  Boskenso manor, iii. 77
  Bosquet’s Book, i. 214
  Bossiney, account of, i. 340.――Or Bosinny by Leland, iv. 258
  ―――― cove, i. 343
  ―――― manor exchanged for Wining Winington, ii. 128
  Bostock, Edward, iv. 26
  Boston, America, iii. 72 _bis_. The people ungrateful to Mr. Peters 73
  Bostowda, ii. 330
  Bosvigo, ii. 318
  Boswallow, account of, i. 392
  Boswaydel, etymology, ii. 353
  Boswellick, i. 19
  Bosworgy, account of, i. 224
  Bosworth field, ii. 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_――iii. 206
  Boswortha, i. 29
  Botallack mine, and garnets at, ii. 291
  Botallock, account of, mines valuable, ii. 285. Produce copper below
    the tin 286
  Botelett manor, ii. 397
  Botolph’s, St. passage, iv. 185
  Botowne, iv. 111
  Botreaux, iv. 48
  ―――― castle, iii. 39, 234, 235 _bis_.――iv. 228.――Port of, iii. 235, 236
  ―――― William de, i. 340. Family 368.――Lord and family, ii.
    397.――William de, iii. 232. William 353.――Lord, iv. 138. His heir
    138, 139
  ―――― of Botreaux, William Lord B. and his daughter, iii. 234. Family 234
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378. Richard, William 378
  ―――― honor of, iii. 234, 235
  Botusfleming parish, i. 162――ii. 361, 363, 364
  BOTUSFLEMING, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 103.
    Ancient state, value of benefice, land tax, Muttenham, i. 104.
    Father Peter’s rhymes, etymology by Tonkin, by Editor, singular
    occurrence 105. Statistics, rector, Geology 106
  Bouchier, Foulk, of Tavistock Lord Fitzwarren, i. 170. Lady Frances
    411. Henry, sixth Earl of Bath 411. Rev. Henry, and his daughter
    396. Richard, fifth Earl of Bath 411.――Jane and Captain Richard,
    iii. 187
  Bourdeaux, Joseph of Exeter, Archbishop of, i. 325
  Bouvardia tryphilla, iv. 181
  Bowden family, Reginald and arms, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trelisick, John, i. 399
  ―――― marks, i. 11
  Bower, Rev. J. of Lostwithiel, iii. 29
  Bowles, P. P. iii. 279
  Boy Bishop, monument of, in Salisbury Cathedral, ii. 313
  Boyeer, i. 88
  Boyer, Mayor of Bodmin, ii. 198
  Boyle, Edmund Earl of Cork, ii. 385. Family 354. Their share of the
    Courtenay property 385
  Boyle’s Biographical Dictionary, iv. 87
  Boyton, Robert de, ii. 412
  ―――― parish, ii. 234, 417, 429 _bis_――iv. 39, 40, 42, 61, 153
  BOYTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, land tax, etymology, Bradridge, i. 107. Northcott, history
    of Agnes Prest 108. Mount Calvary, a Cornish poem 109. Doctrine of
    transubstantiation, etymology by Tonkin 110. By the Editor, place of
    Agnes Prest’s martyrdom, statistics, vicar, Geology 111
  Brabyn family, i. 223, 225.――Mr. executed, iii. 184
  Braciano, Duke of, ii. 371
  Braddock or Bradock parish, iii. 59, 347. Living of 451.――Rectory,
    i. 72
  Braddon, Henry, and Captain William, ii. 87. Mrs. 338. Family,
    account, of 87.――Mr. iii. 252.――Lieut. Colonel, iv. 188
  ―――― of Treglith, William, iv. 62. Mr. 62
  Brades, Barton of, ii. 153
  Bradford, ii. 429
  ―――― Rev. Mr. i. 292. Family 289
  Bradley, Dr. life of, ii. 376
  Bradoak or Bradock downs, i. 113, 114――iv. 185, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― parish, i. 167――iv. 129, 155
  BRADOCK St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, endowment, land tax, i. 112. By Tonkin, patron,
    incumbent, manor 112. By the Editor, living consolidated, residence
    removed, patron 112. Bradock down, the scene of a royal victory in
    1623, and of Lord Essex’s escape in 1644, 113. Exasperation of the
    royalists, expulsion of rebels from Cornwall, King’s farewell to the
    sheriff 114. Statistics, and Geology 115
  Bradridge, i. 107
  Bradryche, ii. 429
  Brady, Dr. iii. 27――iv. 81.――His Treatise on Boroughs, ii. 200――iv.
    81 _bis_, 83, 84 _bis_
  Braghan or Brechanus, St. King of Wales, built the town of
    Brecknock, was father of St. Keyne, St. Canock, and St. Cadock,
    ii. 292. Had 24 daughters and 2 sons, all Saints 294
  Bralton Clovelly, living, iii. 67
  Bramer, Elizabeth W. and John, iii. 86
  Bramford, Earl of, a Royal Commissioner, iv. 189
  Branell or Brannell manor, ii. 100, 109 _bis_――iii. 195, 448 _ter._,
    451. Etymology 452. Extent 451
  Brannel forest, iii. 451, 452
  Brannell’s, Lady, tomb, ii. 114
  Branscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, _see Brounscomb_
  Branston, Judge, iii. 144
  Bray, account of, iii. 250
  Bray, Reginald, i. 87.――Francis de, ii. 118. Lord 282, 311. Mary
    118. Ralph, Sheriff of Hants 310. Family 282, 284 _bis_
  ―――― of Bray in France, ii. 311
  ―――― of Bray in St. Just, ii. 310, 311
  ―――― of Cornwall, family, ii. 237
  ―――― of Killington, Sir Edward, ii. 310. Sir Reginald, arms 311
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 282
  ―――― in Morvall, ii. 283
  Braydon, Captain, iii. 184
  Braye, de, family, i. 163 _bis_
  Brazen-nose College, Oxford, ii. 33
  Brazilwood, iii. 186
  Breaca, St. Life of, iv. 263
  Breadfruit tree, the Bounty went out to fetch plants of, iv. 45
  Breage, St. i. 263――ii. 353――iii. 431
  ―――― St. Church, iii. 285, 444
  ―――― St. parish, i. 115, 310, 344, 355――ii. 80――iii. 442.――Register,
    ii. 81. People of 82. Great Work mine at 83. Geology of, similar
    to Germow 85
  ―――― stone, i. 128
  Breath’s cattle, iv. 35
  Breca, St. iii. 342
  Brechan, St. painting of in St. Neot’s Church, ii. 298
  Brecknock, derivation of its name, i. 2. Built by King Braghan, ii. 292
  Breda, iii. 454. Lord Hollis, ambassador at 148
  Brend, George, iii. 387
  Brendon, William, iii. 163
  Brentford, Middlesex, i. 68――iii. 144
  Brenton, Henry, i. 24
  Breock, St. his history, i. 115
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 177
  Breock, St. parish, i. 301, 372, 373, 377, 406――ii. 80, 89, 253
    _bis_, 256, 257――iii. 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
  BREOCK, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    saint’s history, value of benefice, i. 115. Ancient state, Pelton
    manor, Hurston, Tredinick 116. Trevordei, by Tonkin, Etymology of
    Dunveth, by the Editor, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 117
  BREOCK, St. in Kerrier parish, or Breage, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, daughter churches, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, ancient state, i. 118. Pengelly, Godolphin
    119. Carew and Sammes on its etymology 120. Pengarwick 124. By
    Tonkin, a Cornish distich 124. King Germoe’s throne 125. By the
    Editor, Earl of Godolphin, stanza upon his pedigree 126. Parish
    covered with mines, Whele Vor Mine, first steam engine in
    Cornwall, Pengelly, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 128
  Brereton, Mr. Trelawney, i. 358
  Brest, ii. 127
  ―――― haven, ii. 171. A formidable combined fleet harbours in 247
  Bretagne, iv. 145
  Breton, Cape, iii. 218
  ―――― millers more hardy than Cornish, ii. 24
  Bretons, iii. 336
  Brett, captain, iv. 188. Charged the parliament army under Skippon,
    knighted on the field 188
  Brewar, or Brewer, William, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 75――iii. 182
  ―――― St. Breward, or Brewer parish, i. 62, 103, 174 _bis_, 254――iii.
    222, 223, 224――iv. 48, 49, 93, 95 Breward, St. or Simon Ward
    district, iv. 97. Porphyritic rocks in 99
  BREWARD, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, land-tax, founder of church, i. 129. His
    history, benefactions, impropriation of this benefice 130. By
    Tonkin, name of Simon-Ward 130. By the Editor, Lank Major, Lank
    Minor, Swallock, Hamethy, Roughtor, and Brown Willy 131.
    Statistics, vicar, patrons, Geology by Dr. Boase, sterility,
    loneliness of church, west fertile 132
  Brewer, i. 1, 60. William, Lord Brewer 129. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 129, 130 _bis_
  Bricot, i. 331 _bis_, 332
  Briddon, Lieut.-col. i. 113
  Bridge place, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 80
  ―――― end meadow, iv. 31
  Bridgerule church, i. 133
  ―――― parish, ii. 413, 430――iii. 114――iv. 152 _bis_
  BRIDGERULE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church in Devon,
    value of benefice, ancient state, by Tonkin, etymology, i. 133.
    Tackbere 134. By Editor, Tacabre, pedigree of Gilbert 134.
    Statistics, vicar 135
  Bridges, ii. 292
  Bridget, St. chapel at Landew, iii. 42
  Bridgewater, ii. 76. St. James’s hospital at, properly St. John’s
    412――iv. 254 _bis_
  Bridgman, Edward, ii. 196.――Sir Orlando, iii. 159
  Brigantes, i. 256
  Brightley, chapel at, ii. 348
  Brinn in Cornwall, ii. 348
  Brismar, ii. 208
  Bristol, i. 113, 373――ii. 76 _bis_――iii. 76, 89, 129.――Jonathan,
    Bishop of, i. 84.――St. James’s priory at, ii. 147.――Battle before,
    iii. 200, 204. Sir Jonathan Trelawney, Bishop of 296, 297 _ter._
    298 _quint._ One of the seven 296, 299. John Lake, Bishop of 296.
    Sir R. R. Vvyyan, M. P. for 137.――Henry Combe, mayor of, iv. 90.
    Mr. Coster, M. P. for 89
  ―――― channel, i. 381, 384――iii. 240
  ―――― waters, iii. 94
  ―――― John de, iii. 354
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25
  Britain, i. 335, 336 _bis_――ii. 1, 66, 75――iv. 116.――Churches of, i.
    294.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65. Various places
    dedicated to him in 75. Pelagians of 73. Pelagius, an inhabitant
    of 63.――Its Celtic inhabitants, iii. 49. St. Sennan came to 434
  ―――― Edmund of Hadham, Earl of, iii. 65
  Britany, i. 115――ii. 90, 123, 127――iii. 102, 281,
    285.――Pronunciation in, ii. 128
  ―――― Alan, Earl of, ii. 147
  British barrows, iii. 319
  ―――― camp, i. 369――iii. 111, 319
  ―――― channel, i. 26, 38, 41, 52, 135, 388――ii. 26, 36, 39, 50, 59,
    105, 106, 126, 171, 250, 319, 378――iii. 11, 102, 118, 129, 190,
    240, 257, 283, 421, 423, 429, 430, 436, 441, 442――iv. 19, 21, 23, 99
  ―――― Critic, iii. 407
  ―――― intrenchments, iv. 53, 94, 140
  ―――― minerals, greatest number of specimens from St. Just parish,
    ii. 291
  ―――― monarch, ii. 66
  ―――― Museum, i. 283, 300――iii. 154, 233, 408――iv. 33
  ―――― music, remnant of, ii. 166
  ―――― ocean, ii. 1 _bis_, 174, 237, 283――iii. 74 _bis_, 128, 198
  ―――― ornaments found, iii. 290
  ―――― tongue, iii. 114
  Britnall, John, ii. 196
  Brito, a poet, his lines on Arundell, iii. 149
  Britons, i. 295, 334――ii. 206, 261. Ancient, iii. 52, 365――iv. 168.
    their manner of writing. Religious ceremonies, and notion of the
    Deity, i. 193.――Believed in the appearance of St. Michael on their
    shore, ii. 172. Geruncius, King of 50.――Their names, iii. 130.
    Cadwallo, King of 284.――Inhabited one side of the Tamar, iv. 40
  Britton’s Beauties of England and Wales, i. 183, 194――iii. 244
  Britwyn, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Broadgate hall, Oxford, now Pembroke college, iii. 233
  Broadoak parish, iii. 348――iv. 159
  BROADOAK parish, additional sheet, by Hals, App. 4. Communicated by
    Mr. Polwhele; and supposed to be separated from the work in the
    bookseller’s hands. Situation, boundaries, etymology, iv. 184.
    Value of benefice, incumbent, and land-tax, Essex’s march to raise
    the siege of Plymouth, Sir Richard Grenville removes, Essex
    follows him, and encamps on Bradock downs, King Charles marches to
    Grenville’s assistance 185, and also encamps there, his overtures
    for peace, rejected by Essex, skirmishes, remarkable challenge
    186, and combat, related to Hals by several eye-witnesses, Essex
    obliged to retire 187. A battle 188. Treaty 189
  Brockland advowson in Kent, iii. 115
  Bromley of Lefeock, iii. 188
  Brook, Sir John, i. 87.――York herald, ii. 155
  Brook’s catalogue of Earls of Devon iii. 436
  Brounscomb, Walter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 209.――Founded a college,
    ii. 96. His death 97. Admonished in sleep to build Glasney college 341
  Brown, Anne and Rev. James, iii. 301. Dr. William, of Tavistock
    184.――James, iv. 4
  ―――― Walley, i. 201
  ―――― Willey, i. 131, 132, 188, 310――iii. 44
  Browne, George, of Bodmin, iii. 353, 459. G. F. C. 459. M. A. Lord
    Montague 231. William 153.――George of Bodmin, iv. 41
  Bruce, Edward, of Edinburgh, and his daughter, iv. 74
  Bruges in Flanders, iv. 14
  Brugmansia suaveolens, iv. 181
  Brune, Rev. C. Prideaux, i. 17――iii. 279
  Brunion, iii. 7
  Brutton, Elizabeth, i. 403
  Bryant of Bushill, John, and family, iii. 351
  Bryher island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  Bryn, iv. 161, 162.――Barton of, ii. 94, 332, 335
  Buck, L. W. ii. 416
  Buckhurst, Lord, ii. 9
  Buckingham, George Villiers, Duke of, ii. 382.――Duke of, iii. 183
  ―――― of Probus family, iv. 161
  ―――― palace, iii. 205
  Buckinghamshire, i. 353.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10. Mr. Praed, M. P.
    for 11
  ―――― Earl of, ii. 265, 268, 270――iii. 406
  Bucknam, John, ii. 189
  Buckwell, Miss, of Tyringham, iii. 10
  Buclawranbucke, ii. 429
  Bucton, Thomas de, iii. 354
  Bude bay, iii. 349――iv. 12, 13
  ―――― village, iv. 17. A watering place 18
  Budeox, i. 348
  Budeoxhed of Budeoxhed, Agnes, i. 348. Elizabeth 348. Philip, Thomas
    348. Thomas 347. Winifred 348. Arms 348
  Budeoxhed church, i. 348
  Buderkvam, i. 242
  Budge, ii. 54
  Budock church, ii. 3
  ―――― parish, i. 236――ii. 1 _bis_, 2, 3, 92 _bis_, 94, 96――iii. 74,
    77.――Rev. G. Allen, vicar of, iv. 95
  BUDOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, i. 135. Killigrew
    monuments, Arwinick, Rosmeran, Trescobays, death of Sir R. Vyvyan,
    Treon 136. By Tonkin, Swan pool, Trewoon 137. By the Editor,
    Penwenis, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 137. Export of
    granite, heave at Swan pool, bricks 138
  Budock, St. ii. 127, 128
  Budocus, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Budok, St. by Leland, iv. 283
  Buggin, Robert, ii. 319
  Bull, Rev. J. of Lezant, iii. 43
  Buller, Adm. Sir Edward, i. 321. Family 74, 221, 230, 246,
    266.――John, ii. 397. John T. 394. Family 170.――Francis, monument
    to, iii. 292. Colonel F. W. 293. James 361. J. F. 291, 383.
    William, Bishop of Exeter 301. Mr. 253, 361. Family 148 _bis_,
    390, 462. Edward, brother of the judge, and Mrs. iv. 37
  ―――― of Downs, James W. iii. 249. Mr. 249, 427
  ―――― Rev. John, of St. Just in Penwith, and of Perran Zabuloe, iii. 333
  ―――― of Lillesdon, Somersetshire, family, iii. 463
  ―――― of Morval, i. 317 _bis_. John 250. John 411.――John, ii. 85. Mr.
    396.――Anthony, iii. 230. Edward, Francis 249. James 229, 248, 249.
    Jane 229, 249. John 230, 248, 249 _bis_. John 249, 293, 297, 381
    _bis_, 463. J. F. 248 _bis_. Arms 249.――Elizabeth and John, iv.
    25. Mr. 22
  Buller, of Portlooe, Edward, the judge, iii. 333, 117
  ―――― of Shillingham, Francis, iii. 212, 215, 248, 381, 463. Francis,
    story of 463. James 248. John 463, 464. Richard 463. Sir Richard
    463 _ter._ Family 212
  ―――― of Shillington, Francis, i. 396
  Bullock, i. 28, 44, 78, 84.――Philip, ii. 189
  Bullœum, or Buelt, in Brecknockshire, iv. 8
  Bullsworthy, Barton, account of, iii. 3
  Bulteel, ii. 151, 319.――Miss, iii. 134
  Bunerdake, in St. Ives, iii. 359
  Bungay, Friar, supposed to have, by magic, raised a mist at the
    battle of Barnet, ii. 182
  Bungred, King of Mercia, i. 49
  Burdett, Sir Francis, chief promoter of the Reform Bill, and Miss,
    iii. 205
  Burgess, Mr. ii. 157.――Thomas and Thomas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Truro, i. 225
  Burgh, etymology of, i. 77
  ―――― Hubert de, Earl of Kent, iii. 349
  Burghert, married to Grenville, ii. 341
  Burgoigne, i. 177.――William, recorder of Exeter, ii. 189
  Burgundian court, ii. 188
  Burgundy, i. 107, 335――ii. 75――iv. 117
  ―――― Margaret Duchess of, ii. 188
  Burgus manor, ii. 253
  Burian, St. church, i. 149 _bis_――iii. 30, 431
  ―――― deanery, i. 147――iii. 30
  ―――― parish, i. 141――ii. 60, 265.――Etymology, i. 142
  ―――― St. parish, i. 146, 321
  ―――― or Burien, or Buryan, St. parish, iii. 30, 36, 283, 290, 322,
    425 _bis_, 428 _quat._
  BURIAN parish, by Hals, situation, antiquity, etymology, by Camden,
    i. 138. Founder, a regal peculiar, college, Pope’s usurpation 139.
    Boscawen Ros, Boscawen family 140. Boscawen downs, Dance meyns,
    and other ancient remains 141. Bolleit’s stone, Trove 142.
    Entrenchment there 143. Subterranean vault, royalists concealed
    there in civil wars, Pendrea 143. Burnewall, lake, aloe 144. By
    Tonkin, parish extensive, climate warm 144. Improvements of Mr.
    Paynter, Leigha, Boscawen Rose 145. By Editor, etymology, deanery
    146. Ecclesiastical abuses, non-residence, Pendrea, curious
    shellwork at Burnuhall 147. Shells at Porth Kernow, Boskenna,
    Vyvyans of Trelovornow, recluses at Boskenna 148. Church,
    trigonometrical survey, statistics, rector 149. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, and by Editor 150
  Burien’s, St. college, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Burke, Lady Dorothy, ii. 93
  Burleigh, Lord Treasurer, i. 341. Mr. ii. 302
  Burlington, Earl of, ii. 326
  Burncoose, porphyry found near, ii. 136
  Burne, captain, ii. 25
  Burnell, Robert, iv. 146
  Burnevas, iv. 161
  Burnewall, etymology of, i. 144
  Burngullo, manor and village, iii. 197
  Burnuhall, curious shell-work at, i. 147
  Buroughs, of Ward bridge, i. 225
  Burrow Bel-les opened, description of, ii. 301
  Burthog, iv. 157
  Burveton, Walter de, iii. 2
  Burwaldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415 _bis_
  Bury, St. Edmund, iii. 85
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 296
  Buryan parish, ii. 48, 282 _bis_――iv. 2
  Buryana, St. i. 138
  Buryas bridge, iii. 99
  Buryen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Busvargus, account of, ii. 86
  ―――― of Busvargus family, ii. 265, 286 _bis_
  Bute, Lord, ii. 245
  Butler, Simon, Lord of Lanherne, ii. 145 _bis_. Rev. Mr. 394
  ―――― Symon, iii. 139. Dr. 385, 434.――His Lives of the Saints, i;
    146――iii. 330, 332.――Colonel, iv. 189
  Bynany Castle, iv. 228
  Byron, Admiral John, his marriage, and “Narrative,” iii. 205.
    Grandfather of Lord Byron the Poet 205. Captain, his duel 152, 156
  Byzantine palace, ii. 366

  Cabellan, iv. 128
  Cabulian, i. 168 _bis_――iii. 89
  Cadbury, i. 337
  Cadd, Henry, iv. 18
  ―――― or Cadock, Earl of Cornwall, iii. 82, 462. His history, and
    arms, i. 203. Agnes or Beatrix, his daughter, iii. 463
  ―――― St. ii. 292
  Cadgwith, ii. 117, 331, 360――iii. 259, 424. Account of by Hals 421.
    By Editor 423
  Cadix, St. iv. 113
  Cadiz, iii. 98, 287
  Cadwallo, King of the Britons, iii. 284
  Caeling manor, iii. 267
  Caen in Normandy, university of, iv. 144, 145.――Michael Tregury, its
    governor, iv. 138, 144, 145
  Caer Brane, i. 230
  ―――― Broas, iii. 129
  ―――― Byan, iii. 129
  ―――― Cuby, i. 295
  ―――― Iske, i. 328 _ter._, 342
  ―――― Kief, iii. 316, 317 _bis_
  ―――― Kynock, account of, iii. 369
  ―――― Segont, i. 326
  ―――― Voza, iii. 366
  ―――― Went, in Wales, iv. 44
  Caerton, i. 261.――In Crowan, ii. 141
  Cæsar, i. 107, 323, 334――ii. 3――iii. 185 _ter._――Julius, i. 397. His
    Commentaries 193――ii. 237――iv. 116
  Cæsars, iii. 369
  Cagar quarry, ii. 117
  Cainham, in Holderness, Yorkshire, ii. 292
  Cair Kinan, by Leland, iv. 264
  Cairdine, by Leland, iv. 264
  Caitfala, i. 257
  Caius, St. Pope, and kinsman of Dioclesian, ii. 302
  Calais, i. 169 _bis_.――The siege of, ii. 159. Foy men assisted at
    39, 45
  Calamagrestis arenaria, iii. 6
  Calavega in Spain, i. 311
  Calceolaria, iv. 181
  Calenack, smelting house at, ii. 317
  Calendula tragus, iv. 181
  Calestock Rule, ii. 173
  ―――― Veor, ii. 173
  Calf, British-Cornish for, ii. 335
  Caliburne, i. 334
  Caligula, Caius, Emperor of Rome, iii. 184
  Calimontana, i. 206
  Call, family and arms, i. 162.――Sir William, ii. 231.――George, iv.
    41. Sir George 9, 41. Memoir of 9. Sir John 136. Sir William P. 11
  Callington borough, John Call, M.P. for, iv. 10
  ―――― manor, its possessors, ii. 313
  ―――― parish, i. 159, 316――ii. 231
  CALLINGTON parish, by the Editor, appendage to Southill, situation,
    boundaries, members of parliament, markets and fairs, manor, i.
    151. Church and town, monuments, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 152
  Callmady, ii. 136
  Calstock parish, i. 151, 159, 310, 316――iii. 101――iv. 6, 7.――Chapel
    at 322
  CALSTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, founder,
    patron, first-fruits, incumbent, land-tax, free-fishing granted,
    salmon wear, i. 153. Cuthele, by the Editor, extensive mines,
    Cotehele 154. Description of 155. View of the chapel 156. Visit of
    George III. and Queen Charlotte 157. Garden chapel 157. Battle of
    Bosworth, Harewood, Sandhill 158. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 159. Canal 160
  ―――― Ruol, etymology, iii. 325
  ―――― Veor, iii. 321
  Calvin, iii. 188
  Calway, John, iii. 261
  Camber island, iv. 238
  Camborne or Cambourne parish, i. 128――ii. 56, 250 _bis_, 337――iii.
    248, 367, 387, 389, 390――iv. 5
  CAMBOURNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    holywell, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    Pendarves, i. 160. Menadarva, story of Mr. Arundell 161. Roswarne,
    apparition, crane, Treswithan 162. By the Editor, rapid rise of
    the town, church tower, market, Pendarves 163. Menadarva,
    Roswarne, Crane, Mr. R. Trevithick, statistics 164. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Delcoath, and Cock’s kitchen mines 165. Soil good near the
    town, barren further north 166
  Cambræa, ii. 225
  Cambrensis, Giraldus, iv. 113
  Cambridge, i. 72――ii. 76, 104
  ―――― university, iii. 72, 454――iii. 270
  Cambridgeshire, ii. 97.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Camburne de, i. 359. John and John 348
  ―――― parish, i. 261――ii. 136, 141 _bis_, 144, 234, 239 _bis_
  Camden, the antiquary, i. 85, 138, 146, 168, 178, 179――ii. 65, 172
    _ter._, 173, 237, 257, 258, 283, 293, 402, 403, 418――iii. 1, 24
    _bis_, 25 _ter._, 129, 149, 313, 336, 357――iv. 8, 44, 75, 79.――His
    Britannia, i. 120, 213, 220, 257, 325――iii. 430.――His history
    lecture at Oxford, ii. 233.――His annals of Queen Elizabeth, iii.
    368. His Editor 226
  ―――― Lady, i. 72
  Camel river, i. 117, 132, 372 _ter._, 377.――A winding channel, ii.
    40. Ran with blood 40
  Camelford borough, i. 74, 94, 117, 337, 340――ii. 154, 236, 338――iii.
    81, 89, 136, 235――iv. 20.――An adjective, ii. 171.――Battle at, iii.
    322. Roman road through 324.――The mayor of, ii. 236. Charles
    Phillipps, M. P. for 399――iv. 45
  ―――― Thomas Pitt, Lord, ii. 405.――Thomas Pitt, first Lord, i. 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas Pitt, second Lord, his birth and
    christening, education, history, and character 70. Death 71
  ―――― manor, iii. 27
  ―――― town, etymology, name, ii. 402. Market and a fair, not a fair
      town, borough, had its first charter from Richard, Earl of
      Cornwall 403. Revenue, arms, rent paid to the Duke 404. Dr.
      Lombard passing through afterwards died at 406
  Camellia Japonica, iv. 181
  Camellot, i. 337
  Camp, vestiges of, at St. Syth’s, ii. 405
  “Campaign in the West Indies,” iii. 160
  Campion, i. 382
  Camps, two ancient, i. 39
  Canada, subjugation of, iii. 218
  Canarditone, ii. 145
  Candlemas day, iii. 7
  Canedon priory, ii. 429
  Canna bicolor, iv. 181. Indica 181
  Cannall Lydgye, account of, ii. 254
  Canock, St. ii. 292
  Canon of the mass, i. 198
  Canons Augustine, i. 73 _ter._, 168, 209, 217, 382――ii. 61
  ―――― monastery of, ii. 2
  ―――― priory of, at St. Germans, dissolved, ii. 62
  ―――― of St. Augustine at Launceston, ii. 87
  ―――― black ii. 70.――Black Augustine, iv. 156
  ―――― Clementine, ii. 60
  ―――― regular, college of at Glasnith, ii. 136
  Canterbury, Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 428.――Baldwin, i. 342. Robert
    Kilwarly 83. John Martin 87.――St. Just, ii. 287. St. Mellitus
    288.――Theobald, and Simon Mepham, iii. 115. Mellitus 3rd Archbishop
    of 167. William Sancroft 296. One of the seven bishops 299
  ―――― cathedral, iii. 246
  ―――― Gervase of, iv. 112
  Canute, King, ii. 60, 61, 70. His laws 61, 62.――Ridiculous legend
    of, iv. 96
  Canutus, King, ii. 60
  Cape Cornwall, ii. 290
  Capgrave, i. 295――iii. 332――iv. 93.――His book of English Saints, ii.
    292.――His Aurea Legenda, iii. 167
  Capgrove’s Life of St. Neot, ii. 396
  Cappadocia, i. 52, 388
  Capraria lanceolata, iv. 181
  Car, i. 172
  Cara Villa, Peter de, ii. 209
  Carantochus, St. i. 245
  Carantokes, St. by Leland, iv. 268
  Carbill, Robert Fitz-Hamon, Earl of, ii. 344, 347
  Carborro or Carburrow manor, iv. 130
  Carclaze tin mine, i. 50
  Carclew Barton, account of, iii. 224, 228, 229. Tin upon 225. Aisle
    belonging to, in Mylor church 228. Fine woods of 305
  ―――― purchased and improved by Mr. Lemon, ii. 85
  Carclew of Carclew in Milor, ii. 337
  Cardenham parish, ii. 187――iv. 47, 49, 50, 128, 129, 131, 155――or
    Cardinham, ii. 224, 260, 266
  Cardew, Rev. Dr. C. i. 402 _ter._――Dr. Cornelius, iii. 18.――Rev. Dr.
    master of Truro school, his monument in St. Erme’s church, iv. 85
  Cardiganshire, iii. 336
  Cardinan, Robert de, i. 167, 168
  Cardinham, by Leland, iv. 278
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 7, 225. Lord of Fowey 27.――Isolda de, iv. 107.
    Richard de 62. Robert de 101 _ter._, 102 _bis_, 103. Family 62, 107
  ―――― parish, i. 60, 112, 124――iv. 184
  CARDINHAM parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, manor,
    founder of church, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    ancient state, i. 167. Pedigree of Cardinham and Denham, daring
    exploit of John Denham 168. Called to the peerage, chapel built by
    Lady Denham 170. Glynn 171. Devynock 172. By the Editor, etymology
    172. Glynn 173. Statistics 173. Geology by Dr. Boase 174
  Caregrin, by Leland, iv. 291
  Careswell, ii. 71
  Carew, the historian of Cornwall, i. 152, 178, 210, 241, 258, 324,
    325, 350, 390――ii. 38, 39, 45 _bis_, 62, 69, 93, 147, 157, 172
    _bis_, 173, 197, 203, 204, 205, 230, 237, 251, 260, 261, 294
    _bis_, 358, 384, 394 _quat._, 398, 409 _bis_, 410, 411, 414
    _ter._, 417, 418, 419――iii. 14, 24, 25, 28, 39, 61, 91, 103, 149
    _bis_, 150, 171, 179, 235, 268, 270 _bis_, 276, 279, 287, 291,
    302, 313, 316, 328, 355, 357 _bis_, 374, 388, 389, 392, 437, 438
    _quat._, 439 _bis_, 443, 451――iv. 7, 8, 15, 23 _bis_, 24 _bis_,
    41, 96 _ter._, 112, 113, 132, 134, 162.――His history of Cornwall,
    ii. 296.――His survey of Cornwall, i. 167, 171, 172, 199, 252, 253,
    258, 323, 341, 372, 383, 384, 386, 396――ii. 3, 5, 7, 12, 17, 36,
    41, 89 _bis_, 90, 93, 107, 108, 120, 130, 175 _bis_, 180 _bis_,
    184, 186, 235, 236, 260, 282, 299, 337, 342 _bis_――iii. 66, 79,
    81, 102, 104, 105, 111 _bis_, 125, 129 _bis_, 133 _quat._, 139,
    140 _bis_, 168, 190, 381, 393, 436, 437――iv. 21, 34, 74, 111, 139
  ―――― Alexander, i. 33 _bis_. Sir Alexander 34. Anne 37. John 33, 34.
    Sir John 33, 153. Sir Nicholas 33. Nicholas, Lord 170, 171 _bis_.
    Reginald Pole 37. Richard 33 _bis_. Richard 38. Sir Richard 34.
    William 34. Sir W. C. 37. Sir William 86. Mr. 347. Family 33.
    Pedigree 34. Etymology of name 34, 35.――Sir Edmund, ii. 189. Sir
    George, commander of the Mary Rose frigate 341. Sir Peter 195.
    Family 93, 229, 415.――Sir A. M.P. for Cornwall, and his death,
    iii. 40. John 191. Right Hon. R. P. 439, 440. Sir William 437.
    Miss 60.――Colonel, iv. 185
  Carew of Anthony, John the historian of Cornwall, John his son, and
    Richard, iii. 193.――Miss, iv. 101. Richard, his epitaph, with
    comments, App. 14. iv. 378
  ―――― of East Anthony, Sir Alexander, i. 352
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Henry, iii. 373
  ―――― of Harrabear, Jane, Thomas, i. 352
  ―――― of Penwame, i. 223, 416
  Carey, William, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 4, 271
  ―――― of Clovelly, Sir George, iv. 139
  Cargaul manor, i. 397
  Cargol manor, iii. 267, 268, 270. Account of 267
  Cargoll parish, i. 15, 246, 250, 396, 403――ii. 52
  Cargreen, bargemen of, ii. 375
  Carhayes, the Trevanians removed to, no park at, iii. 202. House
    described 452
  ―――― manor, iii. 451
  ―――― parish, iii. 448, 451 _ter._, 453 _quint._ Rector of 452
  ―――― or Carhays, i. 299.――The name, iv. 9
  Carike road, i. 26――ii. 1――iv. 72
  Carilepho, William, Bishop of Durham, i. 290
  Carinthia, law of, iii. 186
  Carisius, St. history of, i. 379
  Carlian, ii. 308 _bis_
  Carloogus castle, iv. 228
  Carlynike, account of, i. 255
  Carlyon, i. 44. Derivation and arms by Hals 54. By the Editor
    55.――Rev. P. of Mawgan, in Pyder, ii. 160. Family 286
  ―――― of Menagwins, i. 55
  Carlyon of Trengreene, Philip, Thos. _bis_, i. 55
  Carmailoc, ii. 203, 211
  Carmelite friars, i. 83
  ―――― nuns, iii. 150
  Carmellus, i. 83
  Carmenow, ii. 293
  ―――― family, ii. 127――iv. 3, 41. Arms 72
  ―――― Carminow, or Carmynow, Jane, iii. 200, 208. John 208. John, and
    his daughters 131, 132. Ralph 129. Ralph, his arms, and contest
    with Lord Scrope for them 129. Traced to the reign of Arthur 138.
    Distinction awarded him 131. Trial detailed 137. Displeased with
    the sentence 131. His motto 131, 138. Robert 129. Thomas 131. Sir
    Thomas 200, 208. William and William 131. Mr. 464. Family 117,
    129, 135, 200, 208, 423. Heir of 140. Their sepulchre 132. Ancient
    monuments 132, 138. Partition of property 423
  ―――― of Carmenow, John, and his daughter, iii. 133. Family 214, 419,
    421. Their heirs 419
  ―――― of Fengollan, or Fentongollan, i. 65.――John, ii. 109. Drove the
    French from Marazion 171
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 128
  Carminow, Philippa, Sir Roger _bis_. Sir Thomas, i. 241.――Family,
    ii. 354, 358
  ―――― of Boconnock, family and property, iv. 97
  ―――― of Fentongollan, John, iii. 132. John 211 _bis_. John 211.
    Oliver 211, 212. Thomas 211. The great Carminows 211
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Penkevil, John, his hospitality, iii. 214. Oliver 215.
    Thomas 214. Their house pulled down 215
  ―――― of Polmawgan in St. Winnow, iii. 212
  ―――― of Resprin, John, iii. 214
  ―――― of Trenouth, Nicholas, iii. 357
  ―――― manor, iii. 137. Etymology of 137
  Carmynew of Fentongollan, i. 116, 117 _bis_
  ―――― of Resprin 171
  Carn Galva, iii. 244
  Carnadon prior manor, iii. 440
  Carnan bridge, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, iii. 224
  ―――― river, ii. 24
  Carnanton in Pedyr manor, iii. 125, 152. Account of 143. Left to the
    Willyams family and improved 159
  Carnarthen in Illogan, ii. 250
  Carnbray by Leland, iv. 266
  Cambre, monument to Lord de Dunstanville upon, iii. 389
  Carnbrea, i. 165.
  Carndeaw, etymology of, ii. 335
  Carndew, or Camsew manor, account of, iii. 61
  Carne, Richard, i. 9, 10. Family 9. Pedigree and arms 10.――Joseph
    and William, characters of, iii. 95. Mr. 100. Family 94
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, iii. 269
  ―――― of Penzance, ii. 318
  ―――― Bray, account of, ii. 237. Chapel at, account of 283
  ―――― Bray castle, in Luggan, ii. 237, 239, 283, 284
  ―――― Breanic, i. 10. Geology 14. Position and height 15
  ―――― Buryanacht, i. 6
  ―――― Godolcan, by Leland, iv. 264
  ―――― Kye, ii. 237. Quantities of tin at 238 _bis_
  ―――― Mark, tumuli at, ii. 132
  Carnedde, i. 192
  Carnedon barton, iii. 459
  Carnen, ii. 17
  Carnesew, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Carneton, i. 209
  Carnhangives, by Leland, iv. 267
  Carnkie, i. 165――ii. 250
  Carnon branch of Falmouth harbour, iii. 304 _bis_
  Carnsew, ii. 94
  ―――― in Mabe, iii. 125
  ―――― family, ii. 94. Sir Richard and Grace his wife, her monument,
    iii. 66
  ―――― of Bokelly, iii. 61. William 61.――Derivation, ii. 337
  ―――― of Carnsew family, iii. 61.――In Mabe, ii. 335, 337. George 335.
    Sir Richard and two Williams, all sheriffs of Cornwall 335. Arms 337
  ―――― of Tregarne, Sir Richard, ii. 335
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136, 137. John 137. Thomas 136. Arms 136
  ―――― of Trewone, Henry, iii. 61
  ―――― manor, i. 136, 137
  Carock, St. monastery at St. Veep, prior of, iv. 110
  ―――― St. Pill, priory of, iv. 111
  Caroline, Queen, ii. 407
  Carpenter, Humphrey, jun. i. 303. J. P. 3. Rev. J. P. 204. William,
    shot at Skewis 269, 270 _bis_, 271 _quat._, 272 _quat._, 273
    _quint._, 274 _ter._, 275 _ter._ Family 302
  Carpenter of Mount Tavy, near Tavistock, ii. 400. J. P. 400,
    406.――John and Patience, iii. 301. Mr. 42.――Mr. iv. 45
  Carr, Lady Charlotte, iii. 172
  Carraton downs, account of, iii. 44
  ―――― hill, i. 196――ii. 154
  Carreth, account of, i. 298
  Carrow family and arms, i. 35
  Carsbroc, ii. 427
  Carshayes rectory, i. 72
  Carter, i. 223, 224. Honor 216. Richard 215.――Honour, iii. 237.
    Thomas of Dartmouth, Devon 315.――Colonel, iv. 189. Heirs of the
    family 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 222. John 223. Richard 222. Arms 223.――John,
    iii. 325 _bis_. Richard and family 325
  ―――― of Staffordshire, i. 222
  Carteret, Ralph de, ii. 209. Lord 348, 352. George Lord, married
    Grace, heiress of the Granvilles, Countess Granville 346.――Louisa,
    iii. 225. Lord Carteret 255, 256, 353.――Lord, iv. 16, 136
  Carthage, Scipio’s remark on its fall, ii. 426.――Destruction of,
    iii. 106.――Merchants of, iv. 168
  Carthagena, iii. 218
  Cartharmartha, account of, iii. 42
  Carthew, i. 260, 386, 393, 398
  ―――― copper mine at, ii. 256
  ―――― Thomas, ii. 255, 256. Mr. etymology of name and arms 255
  Cartuther, iii. 172
  Cartwright of Aynhoe, Northamptonshire, family, and W. R., M. P.
    iii. 152
  Carvaghe or Carvolghe, in Morvan and St. Tes, iii. 359
  Carvath, i. 49
  Carvean, iii. 355 _bis_. Etymology 364
  Carverth, account of, iii. 61
  ―――― Captain Henry, his history, ii. 94.――Gawan, iv. 77.――Mrs. iii.
    86. Mr. 88 _bis_. Family 61
  Carveth, or Carverth in Mabe, ii. 94――iii. 124
  ―――― O. A. i. 20.――Family of Thoms assumed the name, Thomas and
    arms, ii. 94.――John, iii. 82
  ―――― of Peransand, Anthony and his daughter, iii. 176. Family 187
  Carvinike, account of, i. 386
  Carvolgue manor, iii. 243
  Carwithinick, i. 241
  Cary, Henry, ii. 423
  ―――― of Clovelly, Devon, Mary, widow of Sir George, iii.
    269.――Family, i. 177
  ―――― Bollock or Bullock park, iv. 6, 7, 9. Account of 8
  ―――― of Cockington, Robert, i. 108
  Carynas, account of, i. 292
  Casa gigantas, i. 194
  Cassan, iii. 331
  Cassibelan, i. 10, 334
  Cassibelynn, ii. 3
  Cassiolus, Abbot, iii. 434
  Cassiter, ii. 2
  ―――― street, Bodmin, and its etymology, i. 79
  Cassiteridan islands, ii. 2
  Cassiterides, i. 199
  Castell-an-Dinas, account of, i. 219, 228. Soil 230
  Castelle-an-Dinas, by Leland, iv. 262
  Castille, Alonzo and Frederick 2nd, kings of, i. 311
  Castle Caer Dane, iii. 322. Account of 319
  Castle Carne Bray, ii. 237, 239
  ―――― Cayle, iii. 342
  ―――― Chiowne, description of, iii. 244
  ―――― an-Dinas, account of, iii. 47.――or Dunes, iv. 53, 54. In St.
    Colomb 140
  ―――― Denis, i. 220
  ―――― Dore, iv. 102. Money found at in consequence of dreams 102
  ―――― hill, iv. 136
  ―――― Horneck, ii. 218. Near Penzance 285.――Account of, iii. 83
  ―――― Kaerkief, account of, iii. 320. Well in 322
  ―――― Keynock, ii. 187
  ―――― Killy Biry, or Killy Biny, account of, i. 372
  ―――― Kitty, i. 329
  ―――― Kynoek, i. 77, 88, 94
  ―――― Kynven, i. 329
  ―――― Terrible, ii. 420
  ―――― Treryn, iii. 31. Removing and replacing the rock 31
  ―――― Werre, account of, ii. 156
  Castledour, by Leland, iv. 279
  Castlemaine, Roger Palmer, earl of, husband of the Duchess of
    Cleveland, ii. 11. Appointed governor of Surat, ib.
  Castles after the Conquest, generally built of lime and stones, iv. 140
  ―――― in Cornwall, list of, iv. 228
  Castleton, Lawrence, Prior of St. Syriac’s, iv. 113
  Castletown, i. 261
  Cat eating the dolphin, i. 395
  Catacluse, stone of, iii. 178 _bis_
  ―――― Cliffs, pier at, iii. 179
  Catcher, William, iv. 77
  ―――― of St. Clements, John, iii. 327 _bis_
  Catchfrench, ii. 77 _bis_. Account of 68
  Catherine, queen of Charles the Second, iii. 148
  ―――― St. ii. 36. Her history 36. Her body found, its miraculous
    transportation, her wheel 37
  ――――’s St. ii. 41
  ――――’s St. chapel at Brightley in Kilkhampton, ii. 348
  ―――― St. chapel near Launceston, ii. 419
  Catholic church, general councils of, iv. 165
  Catholic clergy, i. 338
  Cattelyn, John de, i. 246
  Catullus, i. 183
  Catwater, iii. 108
  Cavaliers, song of the, ii. 278
  Cavall, i. 221
  ―――― Mr. arms, ii, Etymology, marriages of heirs, division of lands,
    ii. 335
  Cavedras, smelting-house at, ii. 317
  Cavendish, Lord George, ii. 326. Major, monument to 325
  Caweth of Caweth in Mabe, family and arms, ii. 337
  Cawsand, iii. 108
  ―――― bay, iii. 379
  ―――― village, iii. 379
  Caxton, i. 342
  Caxton’s, William, “Fructus temporum,” i. 338
  Cayl castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Caynham church, in Ludlow, Salop, ii. 292
  Ceall Lidain, iii. 331
  Cecil, Sir Robert, ii. 9. William 213. Sir William, lord treasurer,
    married the daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke 16. Earl of Salisbury
    66. Robert, Earl of Salisbury 213
  Ceely family, i. 256.――Name changed to Silly, iii. 237
  Cell-Cester, i. 326
  Celt, a thunderbolt, iv. 32
  Celtic, i. 172, 342
  ―――― people, iii. 49
  Celts of Cornwall, their conversion, ii. 240
  Ceriseaux, _see Sergeaux_
  Chad, St. patron of Litchfield, Worcester, and Shrewsbury, ii. 391.
    His death 392. Summerhouse dedicated to 391. Inscription in it 392
  Chalk ridges in England, iii. 10
  Challons, of Challons-Leigh, Catherine and Robert, ii. 354
  Chamberlayne, heir of, ii. 109
  Chamberlyne, Lord, iii. 155
  Chambers, Mr. iii. 156
  Chamond, John, ii. 415. His monument 416. Sir John 414 _bis_.
    Richard, remarkable for long life, honours, and numerous relations
    414. Thomas and arms, ib. Residence 416. Family 357, 395 _bis_,
    416.――Family, iv. 18
  ―――― of Trewhythenick, i. 207
  Champernon of Intsworth family, ii. 251, 254. John 251 _bis_. Sir
    John 251. Richard 251 _bis_, 254. Arms 254
  ―――― of Madberie, Devon, Richard and Sir Richard, ii. 251
  Champernoun, William, iv. 102, 103
  Champernown, Jane, ii. 118. John 70 _bis_. Thomas 118. Family
    119.――iii. 47
  ―――― of Halewin, ii. 107
  Champernowne, i. 348
  ―――― Richard, i. 36. Family 293, 313.――Henry, iii. 294. William 276.
    Mr. 448. Heiress 294. Family 276――iv. 107, 127
  ―――― of Beer Ferries, i. 347
  ―――― of Clyst Champernowne, Devon, family and arms, ii. 254.
  ―――― of Darlington, Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Halwyn, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Porth Prior, ii. 65
  ―――― of North Taunton, near Modbury, arms, ii. 254
  ―――― of Umberleigh, near Modbury, arms, ib.
  Chancellor, Lord, i. 270 _bis_――ii. 52, 123――iii. 109――iv. 65.――Sir
    Thomas More, ii. 53.――Richard Lord Scrope, iii. 129
  Chancery court, ii. 52 _ter._, 53――iii. 228
  Chancery suits, ii. 120
  Chandois, Lord, ii. 223
  Chandos, Brook, Lord, ii. 32
  Channel, iv. 12
  Chapel, old British, at St. Ives, ii. 261
  ―――― Carne Bray, iii. 429
  ―――― Comb, i. 12
  ―――― an Crouse, iii. 312
  ―――― garden, iii. 147
  ―――― house, iii. 256
  ―――― Jane, iv. 164
  Chaplin, John, i. 214.――Miss, iii. 11
  Chapman, Edward, i. 237. Story of 238.――Edward, iii. 16
  Chappell Amble, account of, ii. 336
  Chappie, Sergeant, i. 270, 274
  Charlemagne, iii. 335
  Charles, John, iii. 346
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 21, 25, 27, 66, 71 _bis_, 213, 235, 258, 277,
    305, 333, 335, 344, 396, 404, 405, 410, 411――iii. 61, 81, 134,
    142, 144 _ter._, 146 _bis_, 151, 154, 157, 161, 183 _ter._, 199
    _bis_, 213, 243, 269, 303, 315, 318, 358 _bis_, 463――iv. 75 _bis_,
    107, 114, 119 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 156, 162, 172.――His bed-room at
    Cothele, i. 157.――Identified with the established church after the
    Restoration, ii. 20. Sir Beavill Grenville’s services to 343.
    Fired at 411. D’Israeli’s Life and Reign of 78.――At Leskeard, iii.
    20, 42. Entertained at Trecarrell 42. Drew up his forces on
    Carraton Downs 44. His lines in answer to Ben Jonson 146. Le
    Strange’s life of him 145.――A battle of his army near Stratton,
    iv. 13. His managers of affairs 14. Lord Sandys raised a regiment
    of foot and of horse for 58. Marched to Cornwall, quartered at
    Liskeard 185. Surprised a party at Lord Mohun’s house, made a
    proposal of peace 186. Battle with Essex 187. Parliamentary
    generals forced their way through his army, his troops stopped the
    roads, were driven back, he sent Captain Brett forward, and for
    his success knighted him on the spot 188. Granted a parley 189.
  Charles 2nd, King, ii. 3, 5, 8, 21 _bis_, 25, 28 _ter._, 38, 44, 51,
    52, 53, 54, 55, 95, 100, 142 _bis_, 158, 220 _bis_, 235, 277, 302,
    316, 333, 345, 346, 421.――iii. 76, 104, 116, 134, 135 _bis_, 148
    _bis_, 162 _ter._, 186, 201, 209, 212 _bis_, 250 _bis_, 274, 363,
    381, 460, 463, 464――iv. 14, 57, 75, 94, 102, 107, 157.――His
    restoration, and war with the French and Dutch, ii. 27. Peace with
    Holland, debt to Captain Penrose 29. Reproved by Mr. Killigrew,
    his jester 15. Fonder of him than of his best ministers 22
  Charles 2nd, ship, ii. 375.
  ―――― Prince, iii. 185, 363
  ―――― 5th, Emperor, i. 411.
  ―――― 8th, Emperor, bought the empires of Constantinople and
    Trebizond, ii. 368
  ―――― Martel, King of France, iv. 126
  Charlestown, i. 11, 48――iv. 104
  ―――― in South Carolina, attack upon, ii. 268. Ship nearly reached,
    driven back ib.
  Charleton, iii. 438.――Lieut.-colonel, iv. 186
  Charlotte, a story of, ii. 103
  ―――― Queen, i. 157
  Charlwoodia australis, iv. 181
  Charters, inviolability of, identified with liberty, i. 389
  Chasewater, ii. 304, 310, 317. Almost a town 308
  Chatham, William Pitt, Earl of, i. 69 _bis_. Obelisk to him 71
  Chattisham, Suffolk, ii. 149
  Cheapside, ii. 191
  Checkenock or Killignock, iv. 139
  Cheep, Captain, iii. 205
  Cheesewring, i. 184 _quin._, 178――iii. 45 _bis_.――Description of, i.
    185, 186 _bis_, 190, 193
  Cheiney family, iv. 43
  Chelsea, ii. 98
  Cheni, Robert de, ii. 119
  Cheny, i. 383
  Chersonesus, ii. 125
  Chester, iii. 109
  ―――― choir, dedicated to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  ―――― Miss, iv. 129
  Chevy Chase, ballad of, i. 240
  Cheyney, Charles, Viscount Newhaven, iii. 458. John 116.――John de,
    John, John, and John, iv. 43. Sir John and Sir John, both Speakers
    of the House of Commons 44. Ralph de, Robert de, and William de, one
    of them in the Crusades, arms 43
  Cheynoy in St. Endellyan, iv. 43
  Chiandower, ii. 84, 120, 124, 125. Etymology 125. Tin smelting-house
    at 82
  Chichester, ii. 292.――John Lake, Bishop of, iii. 296. One of the
    seven 299
  ―――― Charles, iii. 276
  Chilcot, i. 8, 323
  Chilcott, William, iii. 276
  Chiliworgy, i. 189
  China, ii. 290――iii. 183
  ―――― clay or stone in St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 454, 455 _ter._
  Chinese wall, i. 189――iii. 289
  Chiowne, iii. 289
  Chippenham, i. 257
  Chiverton in Perran Zabuloe, iv. 90.――Account of, iii. 333
  ―――― Sir Richard, i. 314.――Richard and Miss, iii. 162
  Chiwidden, St. the first smelter of tin, iii. 330
  Cholwell, Mr. master of Wike St. Mary School, iv. 134
  Christ Church College, Oxford, iii. 296, 297 _bis_――iv. 86,
    95.――Rev. J. Bull, canon of, iii. 43.――Dean and chapter of, iv. 97
  Christian church divided by heresies, ii. 63
  ―――― festivals appointed for the days previously dedicated to pagan
    rites, ii. 288
  Christianitatus, Deanery of, Exon, ii. 319
  Christopher’s, St. iii. 183
  Chrysocoma cernua aurea, iv. 181
  Chrystallography, ii. 47
  Chubb, Egidius, iii. 153
  Chudleigh rectory, i. 130
  ―――― James, ii. 189, 190. John Sheriff of Devon 235.――General, iv.
    13 _bis_. Taken prisoner 15
  Chudley family, ii. 395
  Chulmleigh hundred, Devon, iv. 101
  Chun castle, i. 229 _bis_
  Church blown up, i. 215
  ―――― of England, iii. 298, 300
  ―――― lands confiscated, iii. 155
  ―――― tower at St. Enedor, fall of, i. 387
  Churches, the different uses of Roman Catholic and Protestant, iv. 103
  Churchill, Anne Duchess of Marlborough, i. 127. Lady Henrietta 234.
    Henrietta Duchess of Marlborough 126. John Duke of Marlborough
    126.――Charlotte, iii. 217
  Chydiock, coheir of, iii. 140
  Chyendur, iii. 324 _bis_
  Chyncoos, account of, ii. 316
  Chynoweth, i. 289. Account of 291
  ―――― of Chynoweth, i. 291. Arms 292.――Anthony, John and his three
    daughters, and Mrs. iii. 125. Arms 126
  Chyton, iii. 326
  Chywarton, iii. 324 _bis_. Account of 325
  Chywoon, ii. 104
  Cileintenat, Roger, iv. 27
  Cineraria populifolia, iv. 181
  Cinque ports, ii. 38
  Ciriac, Caricius or Cyret, St. iv. 112
  Cissa, King of the South Saxons, ii. 284
  Cistercian abbey, at Newenham, Devon, iii. 293
  ―――― or White Friars, i. 83
  Citrane, i. 162
  Civil war, iii. 92, 152, 158――iv. 75, 87, 96.――Havoc of, iii. 294.
    Part taken by Cornwall in 298
  Civil wars, ii. 387, 396, 410――iii. 183, 264, 274.――Trees at Tehiddy
    cut down in, ii. 240
  Clahar, iii. 258
  Clair, Clear, or Cleer, St. parish, iii. 13, 43, 45 _bis_, 260, 266, 371
  Clanricarde, Earl of, ii. 93
  Clare, Earl of, iii. 148. Hollis Earls of 147. John and Gilbert 148
  ―――― St. history of, i. 175. Elopes from her parents and becomes an
    abbess 176
  ―――― poor, nuns, i. 176
  Clare’s, St. well, description of, i. 177――ii. 315. Treasure
    supposed to be concealed and discovered there 316
  Claremont place, Brunswick-square, ii. 396
  Clarenbaldus, King’s chaplain, ii. 426
  Clarencieux the provincial herald, iii. 130, 131
  Clarendon, Earl of, iii. 200.――Advises the imprisonment of Sir
    Richard Grenville, gives an unamiable character of him, ii. 345. A
    partial historian 350
  Clarendon press, ii. 163――iii. 251
  ―――― province, Jamaica, ii. 120
  ――――’s History, i. 114
  ――――’s Rebellion, ii. 347
  Clares, nunnery of, at Truro, and their well at Edles in Kerrier,
    iv. 73
  ―――― poor, ii. 19. First brought to England 19. Nunnery of, at
    Liskeard 170
  Claret, receipt for making, ii. 186
  Clarke, i. 311 _bis_. Rev. J. E. 316.――Jeffrie, ii. 16. Mr. 162
  Classe, G. of Torrington, Devon, ii. 281
  Claude Lorraine, picture by, i. 195
  Clayton, Mary and Sir William, iv. 107
  Clear, St. Cape, iii. 6
  Cleare family, their arms, i. 177
  ―――― of Mertock, Robert, i. 177
  ―――― of Treworgy, i. 177
  Cleare, St. of Tudwell, i. 177
  Cleather family, i. 19, 198.――John sen., Samuel, and arms, iii. 325
  ―――― St. i. 308, 377
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 36――iv. 61 _bis_, 63.――Rocks in, iii. 23
  CLEATHER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    first fruits, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Cletus, i. 197.
    Basill, the Trevelyans 198. Foye Fenton 199. By Tonkin, Basill
    199. St. Eledred 200. By the Editor, Bordeny Abbey, story of Sir
    John Trevelyan 200. Statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 201
  Cleave house, iii. 256
  Cleder, i. 2
  Cleer, St. parish, i. 381, 413
  CLEER, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    first fruits, land tax, name, i. 174. Etomology, saint’s history,
    mendicant friars 175. St. Clare’s well, family of St. Clare,
    Treworgy, Conock, Tremabe, Treworock 177. Pennant, Wring-Cheese,
    the Hurlers, and the other halfstone, Dungerth’s monument from
    Camden 178. From Bond 179. From Polwhele 180. From Hals 181. Bond
    continued 182. Cheesewring 184. Gumbs house 184. Druidical basons
    186. Rock of white marble near Looe, Sharpy Torry 187. View from
    188. Extract from Ovid 189. Kilmarth Hill 189. Druids, from the
    Monthly Magazine 192. Etymology of Kilmarth, cromlech at Trethevic
    193. King Doniert, father of St. Ursula, story of Ursula and her
    nuns, Claude Lorraine’s picture of their embarkation 195. By the
    Editor, other monuments, King Doniert’s death 195. The Hurlers,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 196
  Cleer, St. town, i. 193
  Clement 5th, Pope, iii. 115
  ―――― 8th, Pope, anxious to reform the Greek Church, ii. 370
  ―――― St. Pope and Martyr, iii. 344.――His history, i. 206
  ―――― St. island and chapel, iii. 287
  ―――― St. parish, i. 393, 404
  CLEMENT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, Condura, the Earl of Cornwall, i. 202. Caddock
    his son, Lambesso 203. Oliver King, ancestry of Samuel Foote,
    Penare 204. Tresimple Park, Polwhele 205. History of St. Clement
    206. By Tonkin, the Polwheles, Penhellick, Trewhythenick, Lambesso
    207. By the Editor, Polwhele, Rev. Charles Collins, Penhellick,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 208
  Clement’s, St. church, near Temple Bar, iii. 142
  ―――― parish, ii. 315, 318――iv. 70, 75, 80, 92――or Clemens, iii. 180,
    190, 354 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, has a church of its own, iv. 76
  Clements, Thomas, iii. 246 _bis_, 247 _ter._――Rev. D. of Warleggon,
    iv. 131
  Clemowe, Richard, iii. 387
  Clemsland or Climsland manor, account of, iii. 7
  Clerk, Henry, i. 213 _bis_. John 315. Paul 10.――Bernard, ii. 427.
    Sir George, his seat Pennycuick, county of Edinburgh 20
  Clether, St. parish, ii. 377 _bis_, 378
  Clethra arborea, iv. 181
  Cletus, Bishop of Rome, his history, i. 197
  Cleveland, Barbara, Duchess of, ii. _bis_.――Marquis of, i. 300
  Clicker Tor, ii. 79――iii. 172, 173 _bis_, 180
  Clickitor in Menheniot, iii. 373
  Clies family, iii. 83
  Clifford, Rosamond, i. 240.――Thomas, D. D. iii. 239
  Clifton, iii. 94. Near Bristol 251
  ―――― in Landulph, ii. 365, 371, 372――iv. 373 _quin._, 375. Account
    of 375
  Climerston, ii. 247
  Climsland Prior manor, iv. 9, 11
  Clinton barony, i. 151
  ―――― John 1st Lord, i. 151.――Arabella, ii. 313. General Sir Henry
    268. Lord 231 _bis_.――Margaret, heir of the Earl of Lincoln, iii.
    216. R. G. W. Trefusis, and C. Trefusis, Lords and Lady 230
  Clive, abbey of, Somersetshire, iii. 349, 350
  ―――― Colonel, ruined by a contested election, i. 390.――Family, iii. 94
  Cloak, iii. 222
  Cloake, Dr., iv. 74
  Cloberry, Mr. i. 381.――Miss, iii. 66
  ―――― of Carnedon family, iii. 459
  Clobery, Lucy, ii. 153
  ―――― of Bradstone, iii. 44
  Clode, Major, iii. 338
  Clodworthy, John, iii. 189
  Clome, popular prejudice against in Cornwall, i. 267
  Clopton, Hugh, iv. 134
  Clotworthy, i. 416
  Clowance, i. 266. Description of 288
  Clowberry, William, iii. 2
  Clowens, account of, i. 261
  Cluniac monks, iv. 111
  Clutterbuck, Captain, iii. 288
  Clyfton in Landulph, Theodore, Paleolagus died at, ii. 365
  Clymsland, ii. 429
  Clyse, John, iii. 83
  Coach, ancient, i. 358
  Coade, Edward, iv. 65
  Coalition ministry, i. 389.――Of Lord North and Mr. Fox, ii. 245
  Coat, Sarah, iii. 461
  Cobbeham, John de, iv. 153
  Cobham, Lord, i. 87.――Family, iii. 117.――John de, iv. 13
  Cobœa scandens, iv. 181
  Cock, William, i. 224. Family 234.――John and Robert, ii.
    160.――Anthony and John, iii. 382
  Cock’s kitchen, i. 165
  Cocke, Thomas, iii. 387
  Cocks, Anne, Charles, Lord Somers, Reginald, and family monument,
    iii. 229
  Code of St. Wen, John, iii. 325 _bis_
  Coffin, Rev. C. P. of Tamarton, iv. 42
  ―――― of Hexworthy, Richard, iii. 3
  ―――― of Portledge, Richard, and Miss, iii. 3.――Richard, iv. 40
  Coffyn, Miss, ii. 236
  Cohan, St. iii. 180
  ―――― Martyr parish, iii. 181
  Coill, King of Colchester, i. 237
  Coke, John, i. 20 _bis_
  ―――― of Tregaza, Christopher, i. 395. Thomas 394, 395, 396
  ―――― of Trerice, John, singular history of, i. 394. Arms 395, 396
  Colan parish, iii. 139, 275
  ――――, Little parish, i. 230――iii. 267
  COLAN parish, or Little Colan, by Hals, situation, boundaries, named
    from the Barton, ancient state, founder of church, impropriation
    and value of benefice, patron, rector, incumbent, land tax, family
    of Colon, i. 209. Coswarth 210. Cudjore 211. By Editor,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 212
  Colburn and Bentley, iii. 95
  Colchester, ii. 76
  Coldnell, John, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 7
  Cole family, ii. 216, 217, 336. Captain Christopher 216. Captain
    Francis, R.N. 216, 217. John 123. Rev. John, D. D. and Samuel
    216.――Rev. Samuel, D.D. of Sithney, iii. 446. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian
    56. Mr. 66
  ―――― MSS. i. 300
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170
  ―――― of Devon, Philip, iii. 211, 215
  Coleridge, Rev. J. D. iii. 4
  Coleshill family, ii. 256.――Sir John, killed at Agincourt, his
    infant son heir of the family, iv. 16
  Colgan, iii. 434
  Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica, iv. 106
  Collectio spinosa, iv. 181
  Collet, Sir John, Lord Mayor of London, iv. 134
  Collier family, iii. 277.――Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy, iv. 95
  ―――― of Bosent family, iii. 348
  Collins, Edward, i. 403 _bis_. Rev. Edward 351, 352, 353, 366.
    Elizabeth 352. Rev. John 208, 353. Wrote a note to Steevens’s
    Shakpeare 353. John 403.――Rev. John of Redruth, ii. 243.――Edward,
    iii. 339. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s great grandfather, rector of
    Sithney, Phillack, and Gwithian 446. The poet 219
  Collins of Treworgan, in St. Erme, John, i. 353, 396. Arms
    396.――Edward, iii. 343. Family 343, 382
  ―――― of Treworgye, Edward, ii. 146, 147. Family 146
  ―――― of Truthan, Edward, iii. 165
  Colliton, Mr. iv. 23
  Collon, Little, i. 212
  Collquite or Killyquite, account of, iii. 65
  Collrun in Perran Zabuloe, iii. 319
  Collarian farm, account of, iii. 47
  Collwell, Thomas, ii. 120 _quater._ Family 120
  Collyar, i. 213
  Collyer family, i. 135.――Rev. Mr. ii. 92
  Collyns, Thomas, prior of Tywardreth, his correspondence with
    Cromwell, Vicar General to Henry 8th, iv. 105. Described 106. His
    election, and death 106
  Colmady of Longdon, ii. 137
  Colomb, St. parish, i. 56, 148, 211, 213, 215, 225, 250, 404――ii.
    67, 85, 113, 217, 253.――Or Columb, iii. 149, 160, 324, 395――iv. 53
  ―――― St. Lower, i. 209, 249――iii. 267
  ―――― Major, St. i. 115, 140, 161, 209, 230, 235, 392 _bis_, 407――ii.
    198――iii. 61, 139, 141, 142, 143, 161――iv. 2, 137, 140, 151
  COLOMB Major, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    state, i. 212. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    history and description of church, Arundel chapel 213. History of
    St. Colomba, Jesus chapel 214. Contest for its revenues 214.
    Church blown up 215. Subscription for its repair, pinnacle
    destroyed by lightning 216. Steeple, College of Black Monks 217.
    History of Bishop Arundell, four free chapels, weekly market 218.
    Fairs, Castle-an-Dinas, the Coyt 219. King Arthur’s stone,
    Retallock barrow, the nine maids 220. Truan, pedigree of Vivian
    221. Epitaph on Mrs. Vivian, pedigree of Carter 222. Trevithick,
    Trekyning, Nanswiddon 223. Tresuggan, Trekyninge Vean, Bespalfan
    chapel 225. By the Editor, the Saint, Nanswhyden, consumed by
    fire, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase, Fatwork mine,
    Manganese mine 227. Castle-an-Dinas by Borlase, tower built on the
    walls 228. By the Editor 229
  Colomb Minor, St. church, i. 74――iii. 177
  ―――― Minor, St. parish, i. 245, 251――iii. 269, 275
  COLOMB Minor, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    revenues impropriated, vicars stipend, patron, land tax, church well
    kept, i. 230. Trelvye, Ryalton 231. Mundy family 232. Penitentiaries
    233. Towan, Hendræ, Trevithick 234. By the Editor, Rialton, new
    quay, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr. Boase 235
  ―――― St. Porth, i. 235, 388
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 218
  ―――― St. tower, iv. 229
  ―――― or Columb, St. town, i. 218, 227――iii. 280――iv. 187. Road to
    Launceston from 46
  Colomba, St. i. 213
  Colomba’s St. day, i. 214
  Colon of Colon, i. 209, 210 _bis_. Jane, Margaret 209. Roger 209
    _bis_.
  Colon manor, i. 210
  ―――― manor, Little, account of, i. 209
  ―――― parish, i. 386
  Colquite, i. 262――ii. 180――iv. 22
  Colshill, i. 262
  ―――― of Tremada, John, i. 319 _quat._
  Colshul, of St. Ewe, i. 418. Sir John, _bis_, Joan 418
  Colshull, Joan and Sir John, iii. 316
  Colston family, iii. 95
  Colt, i. 220
  Coltdrynike, account of, ii. 67
  Columba, iii. 331
  Columbes, St. by Leland, iv. 261
  Colyn, Oto, iv. 127
  Comb Alan, ii. 402
  Combe, Barton, i. 132――iii. 181
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  ―――― Henry, iv. 90
  Comborne, i. 288――ii. 136 _bis_
  Come to good, ii. 35
  Come to good Sunday, ii. 35
  Common Pleas, Court of, in Cornwall, ii. 53
  Commons, House of, i. 390 _bis_, 355――ii. 66, 71, 75, 76, 95, 158,
    159 _bis_, 170.――Resolved not to sit on account of breach of
    privilege, i. 345.――Sir John Cheyney twice speaker of, iv. 44
  Comneni, imperial race of, ii. 366
  Comprigney, account of, ii. 318
  Conant, St. iii. 396, 397, 398 _bis_.
  ―――― or Gonnet’s park and meadow, iii. 396, 397
  ――――’s St. well, on Trefrank, iii. 393, 396
  Conanus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Condura or Condurus, Earl of Cornwall, i. 36, 202――ii. 320.――His
    history, i. 203
  Condura manor, ii. 320
  Conerton, ii. 260; or Connerton 145 _bis_
  ―――― manor, exchanged for St. James’s, iii. 140; or Connorton manor,
    account of, ii. 145, 147. Exchange of 145, 147, 148
  Connock, Mrs. iii. 20
  Conock of Treworgy, i. 177. John, etymology of name, arms ibid.
  ―――― of Wiltshire, i. 177
  Conor, etymology, i. 202
  ―――― Mr. master of Truro school, iv. 85
  Conorton of Lanherne, ii. 148
  Conqueror, i. 43――ii. 89――iii. 14, 142 _bis_, 264, 462――iv. 62. His
    death 71
  Conquest, ii. 70, 147, 238, 343――iii. 150, 226, 443――iv. 81 _bis_,
    140. Consort or West Lower hundred, i. 38
  Constans, the schismatic emperor, murderer of St. Martin, ii. 125
  Constantine, Emperor, i. 327. History of 237.――St. iii. 175, 178
  ―――― or Constanton parish, ii. 136――iii. 59, 74, 77, 124――iv. 2
  CONSTANTINE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, i. 236. Saint’s
    history, Trewardevi 237. Story of Mr. Chapman 238. Churches
    endowed by Constantine and other monarchs 240. Notice of Carmenow
    from Tonkin 241. By the Editor, Merther, Trewren, Carwithenick
    241. Chapels at Benalleck and Budeckvam, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 242
  Constantine, St. church of, iii. 175, 178 _ter._ Font at 178 _bis_
  ―――― St. his festival, iii. 178, 179 _bis_
  ―――― St. well of, iii. 175
  Constantinople, ii. 368 _bis_, 370――iii. 187 _bis_――iv. 100, 101,
    148.――Arius bred at, ii. 63
  ―――― emperors of, calling themselves emperors of Rome, ii. 365. Last
    who reigned at, ib.
  ―――― empire of, gold to Charles 8th, ii. 368
  Constantius Chlorus, Emperor, i. 237 _ter._
  Constat of Bishops of Landaff, i. 382
  Convent, the first in Christendom, Franciscan, i. 81
  “Conveyancer, Noye’s,” iii. 154
  Conworthy, west, iii. 103
  Conybeare, Rev. J. E. i. 111
  Conyland, ii. 230
  Cood, ii. 320
  ―――― Michael, iii. 134
  ―――― of Pensimple, William, iii. 238
  Coode, Anne, iii. 248. John 143, 248. Richard 248. Miss 463. Family
    253. Heir of 361. Arms 249. Monuments to 253
  Cook, Mr. ii. 377
  Cooke, family, i. 18.――Sir Anthony, ii. 373. Sir Anthony of Giddy
    Hall, Essex 7, 15. His daughters learned, and their great marriages
    16. Katherine 7, 15. Oswald 423.――Dr., of London, iii. 187
  ―――― of Mevagissey, Joseph, and Paschas, i. 357
  ―――― of Treago, John, i. 248. Thomas 259
  ―――― of Tregussa, i. 142
  Cooper, Anthony Ashley, Earl of Shaftesbury, ii. 379. Bishop
    66.――Rev. Dr. Samuel, iii. 72
  Copgrave, i. 414, 415
  Copleston family, i. 347――iii. 276
  ―――― of Copleston, i. 347. John 104
  Coplestone family, ii. 292. The great 293, 294. Hereditary esquires
    of the white spur, and very rich 293. John tried for murder, and
    John his son, and arms 293
  ―――― of Colbrook, Devon, ii. 292
  ―――― of Warleigh, Christopher, iii. 250
  Copley, Sir Joseph, ii. 76
  ―――― of Bake family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Sprotborough, ii. 76
  Copper, seldom appears on the surface, but is mixed in tin lodes,
    ii. 134. Mode of selling in Cornwall 318. Veins and branches of
    native 360
  Copyholds, renewals of, iv. 54. Converted in Cornwall into leases
    for life, ib.
  Coran, account of, i. 419
  Corbean, i. 49
  Corbet, Anne, i. 36, 203. Catherine 296
  ―――― of Allenaster, co. Warwick, Anne, iii. 456, 463. Robert, her
    father 463
  ―――― of Shropshire family, iii. 404, 405
  Cordall, John, iii. 318 _bis_. John and Ralph 218
  Cordelier or Franciscan friars――_see Friars_
  Coren of Bullsworthy, John, iii. 3
  ―――― of Stephen’s family and arms, iii. 3
  ―――― St. ii. 113
  Corey, Rev. Richard, i. 377
  Corfe Castle, Henry Bankes M.P. for, iii. 221
  Corfu, ii. 368
  Corington, Sir John, his widow, i. 314
  Corinth reduced by the Turks, ii. 367
  Cork, i. 115
  ―――― county, iii. 331
  ―――― Edmund Boyle, Earl of, ii. 385
  Corker, Robert, of Falmouth, i. 399.――Mr. ii. 11.――Robert, iii. 444
  Corlyer of Tregrehan, Thomas, i. 259
  Cornall, Teek, iii. 287
  Cornavy, ancient name for Cornwall, iv. 39
  Cornburgh, Avery, iii. 405
  Cornehouse monastery, i. 407
  Cornelius, St. i. 244
  Cornelly parish, i. 300, 424 _bis_――ii. 356――iii. 182, 188, 189, 354
    _bis_
  CORNELLY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, consolidation
    with Probus, i. 242. Patron, incumbent, land tax, impropriation,
    ancient state, name in 1521, Tredenike 243. By Tonkin, etymology,
    Trewithenike 243. Saint 244. By Editor, Gregor family 244.
    Statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Corneth, John, ii. 375
  Cornish acre, ii. 89, 120
  ―――― antiquities, ii. 392
  ―――― Britons, King Athelstan’s victory over, iv. 40
  ―――― clergy ii. 89
  ―――― critics, their mistakes, iii. 320
  ―――― crown, iii. 451
  ―――― demesnes, iii. 451
  ―――― diocese, visitation of, iii. 456
  ―――― families educated at Truro school, iv. 85
  ―――― historian, ii. 95
  ―――― insurrection, iii. 387
  ―――― kings, iii. 451
  ―――― lawsuits, ii. 53
  ―――― men in Charles the second’s service, ii. 29
  ―――― minerals, Mr. Williams’s fine collection of, ii. 134
  ―――― miners, iii. 229.――Marched against the combined fleet, ii. 245
  ―――― names, App. 9, iv. 312 to 318
  ―――― office for administration of the sacrament, ii. 31
  ―――― people, their insurrection against Henry 8th, ii. 192
  ―――― proverbs, i. 354, 368
  ―――― rebels, ii. 186. King answers their demands 195
  ―――― see, i. 116
  ―――― tinners, iv. 167
  ―――― tongue spoken late, ii. 31 Scawen’s dissertation upon, iv. 193
    to 221
  ―――― trials, ii. 53
  ―――― vocabulary, iv. 39
  ―――― Wonder Gatherer, ii. 173――iii. 392
  ―――― works translated, iii. 288
  ―――― family, i. 10.――Rev. G. J. ii. 309. William 216. Elizabeth,
    lived to a hundred and thirteen, iv. 17
  ―――― of Trevorike, William, ii. 255 _bis_. Miss 255. Mr. 256
  Cornmarth, ii. 133
  Cornua ammonis, plentiful at Keynsham near Bath, ii. 297
  Cornwall, Archdeacon of, William de Augo, ii. 426
  ―――― archdeaconry, iii. 460
  ―――― assizes, i. 173.――Held at Launceston, ii. 422
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 18.――ii. 54, 299 _bis_. Berwoldus 60. Suffragan
    to the diocese of Exeter at St. German 72.――Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― bishopric of, i. 96. 231.――ii. 95――iii. 456
  ―――― cathedral of, i. 73.――Mr. Whitaker’s discussion upon, iii. 408
  ―――― county, i. 327, 328, 334――ii. 19――iv. 48, 49.――Afield of
    political speculation, i. 69. Encroachment of the sea on its
    coasts 60. Rebellions in 86, 88.――The back door of rebellion, ii.
    186. Mr. Rashleigh the first collector of minerals in 47. Recent
    histories of 47. Smallest parish in 49. Judge Dolben a happiness
    to 52. St. German in 65 _bis_. Parochial history of 66. Ancient
    mining of 82. Romantic scenery of 88. Dunstone prevalent in 88.
    Service on the King’s coming into 89. First boarding school for
    ladies in 91. Inundation of sand buried the northern parts of 149.
    Rebels made prisoners in 197. Executed 198. Seven Saxon Kings
    dined together in 284. A petrifier of serpents wanted in 292.
    Fragmentary rocks in 330. Blessings proclaimed to the builders of
    Bideford bridge in all the churches of 341. Contributed to by most
    families of note in 341. Successful royal campaign in 345.
    Gentlemen’s seats in, embellished from Stowe 351. Gold found in
    354. Inaccessible situation of 386. Select vestry in all large
    parishes of 388. Part taken in civil war by 396. Lan used as a
    prefix in 424. Launceston the capital of 431. Hills and bad roads
    of 431.――Relics of antiquity in, iii. 52. Vallies in, heaps of
    rubbish 59. Medicinal waters of 79. No vicarage churches in 114.
    Granite in 432. Devon dismembered from 104, 462. Unsettled state
    of 246. First great iron works in 305. The west of, reduced by
    Athelstan 322. Prince Charles in 363. St Sennan came to 431 _bis_.
    Error of some writers upon 6.――Alien priories in, iv. 101.
    Earthworks in 126. Settlement of the Saxons in 125. Many
    gentlemen’s sons of, educated at Wike St. Mary’s school 134. The
    Northern entrance into, was formerly by Stratton 16. Trevalga in
    the most desolate part of 67. London architecture reaching to 81.
    Copper ores of, purchased by Mr. Coster 89. Truro the first town
    in 85. Essex and his army entered, iv. 185
  ―――― Custos Rotulorum of, Lord Robarts, ii. 379
  ―――― Geological Society of, ii. 291――iii. 424――iv. 122
  ―――― History of, Mr. Fortescue Hitchens assisted in compiling, ii. 224
  ―――― hundreds of, account of them, App. 13, iv. 317
  ―――― Lords Lieutenant of, Earl of Radnor, ii. 380.――Two Earls of
    Mountedgecumbe, iii. 107
  ―――― members of parliament for, ii. 351 _ter._ Sir John Eliot 71.
    Sir William Lemon 85.――Francis Basset, iii. 229. Admiral Boscawen
    219. Hugh Boscawen 40. James Buller 249. Sir A. Carew 40. Sir
    William de Ferrers 165. Sir B. Granville 40. Sir William Lemon
    229, 249. E. W. W. Pendarves 367. Mr. Praed 9. Thomas de Prideaux
    56. Sir Thomas Sereod 165. Nicholas Trefusis 40. Sir W. L. S.
    Trelawny 301. John Trevanian 200, 201, 204. His letter 204. Sir
    Richard Vyvyan 136. Sir R. R. Vyvyan 137.――Francis Gregor, iv. 89.
    John de Tynten 96
  ―――― militia, iv. 37.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, ii. 399.
    Jonathan Phillips, Captain in 399.――Mr. Williams, Colonel of, iii
    159.――Charles Phillips, Lieut.-col. of, iv. 45. Henry Thompson,
    Captain in 109
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 47, 68. Basset 235 _ter._, 304, 394, 395.
    Carnesew 186, 335 _ter._ Chamond 414 _quater._ Champernon 251.
    John Enys 97. Grenvill 341 _quater._ William Harris 139. Orchard
    343. Treffry 43 _ter._――Mr. Amy, iii. 235. Thomas Le Archideakene
    405. Arundell Sir John 141, 274. Sir J. 213. Renfry and Renfry
    141. Humphrey Borlase 238, 268. Hugh Boscawen 213. Buller Sir
    Francis 463. John 249. Richard and Sir Richard 463. Carmenow John
    132, 133. Ralph 129. John and J. T. Coryton 346. Stephen Durnford
    374. Peter, Sir Peter, Richard, Richard and Sir Richard Edgecumbe
    104. John Eliot 337. George Herisey 417. James 419. Richard 417.
    Richard Gedy 337. Edward Herle 41. John de Mawgan 148. Erasmus
    Pascoe 343 Richard Penrose 444. Gregory Peter 176. Mr. Popham 446.
    R. Prideaux 56. Thomas Rawlings 280. John, and Sir John Reskymer
    133. Sir John 147. Hugh Rogers 445. Sir Richard Sergeaulx 65. John
    de Tregaga 211. John Tremayne 101. Charles, Sir Charles, Hugh,
    Hugh, Hugh, William, Sir William, and Sir Wm. Trevanian 199.
    Walter de Treworther 269. Francis, Hanniball, Michael, Richard,
    and Richard Vyvyan 134. John, Thomas, and Thomas Walesbury 116.
    John Worth 62
  Cornwall county, standard of, iii. 332
  ―――― Carew’s survey of, index to, iv. 381
  ―――― duchy, i. 3――ii. 87, 155, 375, 404――iii. 14, 15, 26 _bis_, 28,
    57, 286――iv. 6, 9, 14, 127, 186.――A manor annexed to, ii.
    46.――Robert Corke, receiver of, iii. 444. Holdings 286.――Manor, iv. 6
  ―――― Duke of, i. 75, 202, 253, 323, 413――ii. 145, 229, 230, 309,
    365, 376, 401, 402――iii. 24, 28, 44, 64 _ter._, 81, 223, 328,
    349――iv. 7, 8, 61, 71, 125. His lands 186. Edward I. 296. Prince
    Edward 339.――Edward the Black Prince, ii. 422――iv. 71. Frederick
    Prince of Wales, ii. 84. Solomon, a Christian 338. William 408.
    Edward the Black Prince, iv. 71
  ―――― Dukes of, iii. 14, 15, 24――iv. 72.――Their Exchequer Hall, iii.
    26.――Had a castle at Helstone, ii. 402. List of them from the time
    of Edward III. i. 373
  ―――― Duke and Earl of, i. 318――iv. 7, 8, 78
  ―――― Earl of, i. 151, 153, 202, 318, 322, 323――iii. 448, 462.――His
    castle at Truro, now in ruins, iv. 76.――Ailmer, i. 73. Algar 73,
    74, 94 _bis_, 95. Caddock 203, 254. His history and arms 203.
    Condur 254. Condura 36, 202. Cradock 36. Edmund Plantagenet 253,
    254. John 296 _bis_. John of Elham 256, 339, 341. Piers Gaveston
    338. Reginald 36. Richard 36, 340.――Robert 402. Edmund, ii. 138.
    Prince John, his treason 177. Protected Pomeroy 178. Reginald 420,
    428. Richard 109, 138, 403, 422. Richard Plantaganet 155. Richard,
    King of the Romans 8, 156. Robert 418. Roger 128. William
    418.――Ailmer, iii. 462. Algar 462. Cadock 82, 462 _bis_. Agnes or
    Beatrix, his daughter 463. Condura 462. Edmund 15, 26, 27. Son of
    Richard King of the Romans 285. Edward of Caernarvon 302 _bis_.
    John 27. King 448. Reginald 353. Richard 14, 15, 26, 27, 47, 268,
    350. King of the Romans, &c. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_.
    A promoter of monastic establishments 285. Robert 14, 27, 44. Earl
    of Morton, &c. 291, 345, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam, Earl
    of Morton, &c. 462.――Edmund, iv. 4. His history 368. Gothlois 94.
    John 71 _bis_. Of Eltham, his history 371. Succeeded to the crown
    71. Reginald 169. Incorporated Truro 77. His history 353. Richard
    26, 27, 41. His history 356. Robert Earl of Morton, &c. 15, 67,
    102, 118. Roger 41. William Earl of Morton, &c. 100, 111
  ―――― Earls of, ii. 38, 145, 257 _bis_, 259, 260, 384, 422――iii.
    79, 168, 442, 448, 452, 456――iv. 6.――Held their court at Tintagell
    castle, ii. 402.――Their history, app. 12. Before the Conquest, iv.
    346 to 348. After the Conquest 348 to 373
  ―――― Earls of, Norman, iv. 81
  ―――― Earldom of, ii. 156, 379, 384――iii. 22, 452.――Raised to a
    Dukedom, ii. 155. Lost its feudal sovereignty 392
  ―――― King or Earl of, i. 322, 323
  ―――― Kings of, iii. 326, 452
  ―――― Prince of, i. 327
  ―――― Princes of, ii. 158――iii. 13
  ―――― Launceston Castle, their seat, ii. 418
  ―――― See of, reasons for removing, iii. 416
  ―――― sovereigns of, iii. 365
  ―――― Geffery, iii. 449. Joan 448. John 318. Sir John 27. Richard de
    448. William 449. Family 198
  Cornwall, of Burford in Shropshire, family, iii. 449
  Coronilla glauca, iv. 181
  ―――― valentina, iv. 181
  Corpus Christi College, Oxford, iii. 406
  Corrack road, ii. 281. Account of 284
  Corringdon, Rev. Mr. ii. 340
  Corsican gold, iv. 33
  Cortyder, by Leland, iv. 280
  Corvith, in St. Cuby, iii. 362
  Cory, Rev. W. ii. 364
  Coryton family, i. 410――ii. 32――iv. 130. Johanna, iii. 166. John
    346. Sir John 164, 165 _bis_, 266, 345, 346. John. T., 346 _bis_,
    348. Built a fine house 166. Family 161, 165, 346. Name 165
  ―――― of Crockadon, John, i. 315
  ―――― of Newton family, i. 315.――John, ii. 231. William 305.――Anne
    and Catherine, iii. 162. Sir John 162 _ter._, 176. Sir John’s widow
    163. William and Sir William 162. Family 161. Arms 162.――Sir John,
    iv. 9
  ―――― of Pentillie, Mr. iii. 372.――Of Pentilly, J. T. i. 316
  Cosawis, or Gosose, ii. 100
  Cosens, Nicholas, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 317. Family 319
  Cosowarth, Miss, i. 387
  ―――― Bridget, Sir Samuel, and Nicholas, iii. 135. Miss 116. The
    estates passed to Vyvyan 135
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 387
  ―――― of Penwarne family and heir, iii. 191
  Cossa, i. 326
  Cossens, i. 313
  Coster, Mr. of Bristol, i. 226.――A coppersmith there, took Mr. Lemon
    into partnership, iv. 89
  Coswarth, i. 210. Account of 211
  ―――― Bridget and Sir Samuel, i. 222. Arms 211
  ―――― of Coswarth, Bridget, i. 211. Dorothy 210. Edward 211 _bis_.
    John 210 _bis_. John 211 _quat._ Nicholas, _bis_, Robert, _ter._
    Samuel, Sir Samuel, _bis_, 211. Samuel 212. Thomas 211
  Coswin, account of, ii. 142
  Cosworth, Miss and Mr. iii. 193
  Coswyn de, John, and family, ii. 142
  Cotehele, i. 154, 158 _bis_, 159――ii. 108, 115.――View of  the Chapel
    at, i. 156.――Thick woods about, iii. 102
  ―――― de Cotehele, Hilaria and William, i. 154
  Cotele, iv. 70
  Cotland, ii. 71
  Cottell of Alderscombe, Alexander, and family, ii. 351. Arms 352
  Cotterell’s dispute with Le Grice for the lands of the latter, ii. 277
  Cottey, Christopher, and Mr. iii. 327
  Cottle, Alexander, and his father, iii. 116
  Cotton, William, i. 141. William, F. S. A. 228.――Sir John, iii. 235
    _bis_, 237. His sister 237. William 233, 244. William, Bishop of
    Exeter 233. William, son of the Bishop 234, 235. Family and their
    monuments 233.――Family, iv. 45, 62
  ―――― MSS. 154
  Couch, Reginald, ii. 90
  Coulson, Henry, and Rev. T. H. ii. 359
  ―――― Rev. H. T. of Ruan Major, iii. 420
  Coumb, St. Lower, parish, iii. 139
  Coumbe village, iii. 255
  Council, general, of the British clergy, at St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Councils, ecclesiastical, i. 100 _ter._
  Court barton, iii. 448 _bis_――ii. 395, 396
  ―――― in Lanreath, ii. 394
  ―――― in St. Stephen’s, the Tregarthyns removed to, ii. 109
  ―――― of chivalry, iii. 129
  ―――― leet at Helston, ii. 145.――Of Ryalton, i. 231 _bis_
  ―――― manor, ii. 110
  ―――― roll, tenure by copy of, ii. 51
  ―――― rolls, iii. 234.――Of a manor for three centuries, in
    possession of the editor, iv. 54
  Courtenay, Sir Edward, i. 33. Elizabeth, Florence, and Isabel 65.
    Jane 33. Maud 65. Peter, Bishop of Exeter 373.――Kelland, ii. 353,
    354, 384. Richard and Thomasine 386. Walter 189. William, sheriff
    of Devon 235. Lord William and Sir William 189. Family 354, 362,
    375.――George, iii. 214. Archbishop 171 _bis_. Monument to a 439.
    Family 373, 437.――Nicholas, iv. 112. Lawrence 113. Family 41, 97.
    A branch of at Treveryan 109. Arms 96
  Courtenay of St. Benet’s, Henry, i. 113.――In Lanyvet, Henry, iv. 188
  ―――― of Boconock, Edward, i. 43. Of Boconock and Haccomb, Emelyn,
    and Sir Hugh 64
  ―――― Earls of Devon, Edward, i. 63, 64 _quat._――Edward 11th Earl,
    iii. 436. Edward 12th Earl 437 _ter._ Edward 16th Earl 64, 65
    _bis_.――Hugh, i. 63.――Thomas, and Thomas his successor, iii.
    350.――William, i. 64
  ―――― Henry Marquis of Exeter, i. 43, 64――ii. 375
  ―――― of Haccomb, Sir Hugh and Margaret, i. 262.――Sir Hugh, iii. 437
    _bis_
  ―――― of Moland, Elizabeth and Sir Philip, i. 64
  ―――― of Powderham, i. 411
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 385, 387. Charles and Humphrey 385.
    Kelland 385 _bis_. William, ib.
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, Sir Peter and William, ii. 385――or
    Trethyrfe, i. 65――iii. 133
  ―――― i. 171, 177――ii. 292
  ―――― of Boconnock, iv. 157
  ―――― of Penkivell, ii. 54
  ―――― of Trehane, William, i. 397――ii. 130
  ―――― of Tremeer, i. 396――iii. 187
  ―――― of Trethurfe, i. 397
  Courts of Westminster, Cornwall remote from, ii. 145
  Covent Garden theatre, Mr. Dagge manager of, ii. 34
  Coventry, Lady Anne, i. 37.――Henry, iii. 252
  Coverack, ii. 331 _quater._ Noted for a lucrative trade 324
  ―――― cove, a transport lost in, ii. 325
  ―――― pier, ii. 331
  Covin, i. 205
  Cowley contrasted with Killigrew, ii. 22
  Cowling, John, and his daughter, iii. 288
  Cowlins of Kerthen, i. 266
  Coysgarne, iii. 326
  Coyt, in St. Colomb, account of, i. 219
  Coytfala, now Grampound, i. 353
  Coytpale, i. 257
  Cozens, or Cosens, William, iv. 77
  Crackington cove, ii. 88
  Cradock Earl of Cornwall, i. 36
  Craggs, Harriet; and James, Secretary of State, ii. 75
  Craig Vrance, ii. 305
  Crane, i. 162, 164.――In Cambume, ii. 123
  ―――― of Crane, Richard, family and arms, iii. 387
  Crantock church, i. 74, 248, 250
  ―――― college, i. 247, 250
  ―――― parish, i. 230, 249, 289, 293――iii. 267, 343
  CRANTOCK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 245.
    Ancient state and revenues, impropriation, vicar’s stipend, patron,
    incumbent, land tax 246. Consecrated well, name of church, Treganell
    247. Treago 248. Gannell creek, Tremporth bridge 249. By Tonkin,
    saint’s name, impropriation, incumbent. By the Editor, collegiate
    church 250. Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 251
  Crantoke, by Leland, iv. 285
  Crawley, Judge, iii. 144
  Creation, i. 260
  “Creation of the World,” Mr. Keigwyn’s translation published by
    Editor, iii. 329
  ―――― and “Flood,” i. 109.――Translated, iii. 288
  Crediton, Devon, ii. 69――iii. 248, 415.――St. Boniface born at, iv. 126
  ―――― Leofric, Bishop of, iii. 416. Livingus, Bishop of 415
  ―――― see of, iii. 415
  ―――― college, iii. 7
  Credys in Padstow, not noticed in Tanner, ii. 388
  Creed, Apostles’, in Cornish, i. 252, 260
  ―――― church, i. 258
  ―――― parish, i. 140, 300, 424――ii. 90――iii. 170, 195, 198, 354, 371,
    448, 450, 451
  CREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, i. 251.
    Apostles’ creed in Cornish 252. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, Tybesta, Grampound borough, privileges 253.
    Fairs and market, chief inhabitants, Trevelick, Tencreek 254.
    Pennans, Nantellan, Carlynike 255. Nancar 256. By Tonkin,
    Trencreek, Granpont, ib. Trevellick, Trewinnow, Pennance 257.
    Trigantan, the church 258. By the Editor, Tybesta and Grampound
    ibid. Hawkin’s family 259. Differences of the Cornish creeds,
    statistics, vicar 260
  ―――― rectory house, i. 258
  Creeg meer, account of, iii. 319
  Cregoe, account of, i. 297
  ―――― i. 205. Rev. John 424.――Edward, ii. 54. M. G. 58
  Cremble passage, iii. 105
  Cressy, battle of, iv. 72
  Crewe, Rev. Mr. ii. 86.――Elizabeth-Anne and John, iii. 220. Mr. 185, 211
  Crewenna, St. i. 263
  Crews, Rev. Mr. i. 253
  Crewys, Sir Alexander, i. 347. Mr. of Lesnewith, iii. 22. Mr. 276
  Cricklade, i. 258
  Criticism, &c. letters on, ii. 76
  Croaker of Crogith, i. 299
  Croan, i. 371. Account of 376
  Crocadon, account of, iii. 162
  Crockaddon, account of, i. 313, 316
  Crocker, Michael, i. 8
  ―――― of St. Agnes, Miss, iii. 80
  Croftilborow, iii. 439
  Croftshole, iii. 439 _bis_
  Crogith, account of, i. 299
  Croker, Sir John, ii. 189. Robert 337, 338
  Cromlech at Trethevye, i. 193
  Cromleigh at Lanyon, iii. 89
  ―――― at Malfra, iii. 90
  ―――― in Morva parish, iii. 90, 244
  ―――― in Zennor parish, iii. 90
  Cromleighs, description of them, iii. 90
  Cromwell, Oliver, i. 204――iii. 186, 188, 381.――Curious letter from,
    ii. 47.――His interregnum, i. 204――ii. 277――iii. 421, 449.――His wars
    with Charles 1st and 2nd, iv. 75.――Richard, iii. 188.――Thomas, his
    correspondence with the prior of Tywardreth, iv. 105. Described 106
  Crook, Judge, iii. 144
  Croome family, iii. 192
  Cross family, ii. 252, 397
  ―――― of Bromfield, Somerset, Mary and Richard, iii. 315
  ―――― posts, establishment of, i. 56. Farmed by Mr. Allen 57
  Crosses on moor stones, i. 195
  Crossman, ii. 54
  Crosstown village, iii. 255
  Crostetedon, i. 236
  Crowan parish, i. 118, 160, 355――ii. 122, 139, 141 _bis_, 144,
    272――iii. 7, 65, 384, 389, 441, 442
  CROWAN parish, by Hals, boundaries, ancient state, value of
    benefice, patronage, rector, incumbent, land tax, endowment,
    Clowens, pedigree of Seynt Aubyn, i. 261, Tregeare, by Tonkin,
    etymology 263. Tregeare, Hellegan, Clowance 264. By the Editor,
    patronage of the church, oversight of Hals, Sir John Seynt Aubyn,
    Lady Seynt Aubyn’s marriage portion 265. Stoke Damarel, Devonport,
    advowson, by Lysons, Kerthen 266. Shewis, Henry Rogers’s
    resistance of the sheriffs, fatal consequences 268. His escape,
    arrest, trial 269. Evidence 270. Lord Hardwicke’s charge 278.
    Proclamation 279. His son’s account 280. His death 282. Sir John
    Seynt Aubyn’s letter on the occasion 284. Monuments in the church,
    chapel of ease, charity school, statistics, feast, vicar, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, celebrated for mines, beauty of Clowance 288
  Crown demesnes, iii. 365
  ―――― patronage, ii. 231――iii. 222, 223, 253, 284, 349――iv. 40, 97,
    127, 137, 160. Let 40
  ―――― “Noye’s Rights of,” iii. 154
  Crudge, Adry, i. 357
  Cruetheke, iii. 372
  Cruff of Borew, i. 421
  Crystalline rocks in Linkinhorne, iii. 45
  Cubert church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, iii. 39, 275, 333
  Cuby parish, i. 413――ii. 2――iii. 354, 371, 402, 403, 451.――St. iv. 117
  CUBY, St. parish, or Tregony, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    antiquity, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, history
    of the saint, i. 294. His shrine, privileges of the borough 295.
    Castle, arms of the borough, family of Pomeroy 296. Crego 297.
    Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to render the river Val navigable,
    Carreth 298. Hospital 299. By Tonkin, Crogith, bridge, ruins of
    the old town, and of St. James’s church, its patron 299. By the
    Editor, ancient town, castle, and priory 299. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 300
  Cudan Beke, i. 32
  Cudanwoord, ii. 59
  Cudden Point, iii. 311 _ter._, 375. Curious custom at 311
  Cuddenbeck, ii. 68
  ―――― borough, ii. 69
  Cudjore, account of, i. 211
  Cudworth, Mr. iv. 94
  Culloden, victory of, caused the fall of the Whigs, ii. 244
  Cumberland, i. 289――iii. 246
  Cuming, Alexander, iii. 445
  Cummin, Rev. Mr. ii. 398
  Camming, Sir Alexander, and Mr. iii. 9
  Curgenven, Captain and Mrs. iv. 4
  Curgurven, Rev. William, iii. 357 Curlyghon or Curlyon, ii. 155.
    Account of 301
  ―――― family, ii. 301
  Curlyon family, descendants of Richard, i. 54
  Curnow, John, iii. 343 _ter._ and three daughters 343. Family 54,
    343.――John, iv. 55
  Curran Boake, ii. 61
  Currie or Karentocus, St. church iv. 12
  Curthop, i. 298
  Curthorp, i. 298
  Curtutholl, account of, iii. 170
  Curvoza, account of, iii. 362
  Cury parish, i. 118, 356――ii. 80, 126 _bis_――iii. 110, 127, 128,
    257, 416, 419
  CURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, family of Bochym,
    Arundell’s rebellion, i. 301. Family of Bellot, Bonython 302.
    Bochym, Shewis 303. By Editor, statistics, feast, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 304
  Custendon, i. 236
  Custom house establishment at St. Ives, ii. 261.――At Truro, iv. 74
  Customs, laws of, iii. 423.――Mr. Lamb, collector of, at Fowey, ii.
    47――and excise, laws of, iv. 175
  Cuthbert, St. his history, i. 289.――Bishop of Lindisfarne, iv. 42
  ―――― St. parish, i. 215, 254――iii. 267, 313
  CUTHBERT, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, rector, land tax,
    saint’s history, i. 289. Translation of his relics and the
    bishopric from Lindisfarne to Durham 290. Holywell, Chynoweth 291.
    Carynas 292. By Tonkin, plague, holy well 292. Hallanclose,
    church, Kelsey 293. By the Editor, statistics, feast, vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 293
  Cuthill, i. 154
  Cutler, Sir John and Mary, ii. 380
  Cyric, St. the monk of, iv. 114
  Cyric’s, St. creek, iv. 113

  Dacia, i. 336
  Daddoe, Rev. J. of Merthyr, iii. 189
  Dagge, Mr. possessor of Killigarreen; and Mr. and his brother,
    manager of Covent-garden theatre, ii. 34
  Dal, monastery at, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains enshrined there 90
  D’Albert, Sir Perdiccas, ii. 176
  Dalbier, a parliamentary general, iv. 186 _bis_
  Dallaway’s Chichester, iii. 205
  D’Alneto family, ii. 375
  Dameliock castle, i. 328 _bis_, 329 _bis_, 330 _ter._, 331 _ter._,
    332――iv. 94.――Siege of by King Uter, i. 329
  Damelsa castle, iv. 140
  ―――― house, iv. 140
  Damerell, Sir John, iii. 60. Arms 61
  Damholt, Lord, French Admiral, ii. 342
  Danaus, his daughters, iii. 265
  Dance Meyns, i. 141 _bis_
  Dandy family, ii. 397
  ―――― of Trewenn, William, i. 326
  Danell, i. 383
  Danes, i. 290――ii. 27――iii. 262, 365――iv. 140. Burn Bodmin, ii. 60.
    Bishop Stidio’s loss by 61. Arrived in West Wales (perhaps
    Cornwall), and defeated on Hengiston downs 310. Probably buried in
    the three barrows 317. Their castles 423.――Destroyed Nutcell
    abbey, iv. 126
  D’Angers of Carclew, Isabella, iii. 225 _bis_. James 225. Margaret
    225 _bis_. Richard 225. Family 224. Arms 226
  Daniel, Nicholas, i. 375.――Richard, iv. 77.――Family, i. 434
  Daniell, Thomas, i. 58――R. A. ii. 33 _bis_, 318. Successful in
    mining 33. Thomas 33 _bis_. Built a house at Truro of Bath stone
    33. Member for West Looe 34. Samuel, his Chronicle 284.――Mr.
    succeeded Mr. Lemon, married Miss Elliot, iv. 89
  Daniell’s Chronicle, i. 339
  Danish barrows, iii. 319
  Danish camp, iv. 77. Dissertation upon 78
  Danmonia, iv. 39
  Danmonii, i. 199
  Danvers, Sir John, iii. 316, 317.――Family, i. 121
  ―――― of Dantesy, Wilts, Sir John, iii. 317, 318
  Daphne odora, iv. 181
  Dapifer, Richard, iv. 107
  Darell, Thomas, and family, iii. 240
  Darley family, and Rev. Mr. ii. 226
  Darlington, Lord, proprietor of Camelford borough, sold it since
    Reform bill, ii. 405
  Dart of Dart Ralph, Devon, family, iii. 193
  ―――― river, iii. 103――iv. 158
  Dartmoor, i. 170, 188――ii. 213――iii. 45, 431. Forest 265――iv.
    6.――Hills, iii. 253. Chain of granite hills to Land’s End, from 120.
    Road across them 121
  Dartmouth, ii. 83――iii. 105.――Pirates conveyed to, iii. 41
  ―――― William Legge, first Earl of, iii. 206
  Darwin, Dr. lines by, i. 30
  Daubeney, Giles, Lord, i. 87
  ―――― Catherine and Ralph, ii. 251. Lord 189, 191. Sheriff of
    Cornwall 186
  Daungers of Carnclew, Isabel, iii. 303. James 303 _bis_. Margaret 303
  Davenport, Judge, iii. 144
  Davey of Creed, i. 144
  David, King of Israel, i. 305, 329
  ―――― St. iii. 434 _bis_.――Bishop of Menevia, i. 24, 304, 321, 382
    _ter._ His history by Hals, and by the Editor 305. Legend of 307
  Davidstowe barton, account of, i. 305――parish, i. 21, 197, 199,
    382――ii. 401――iii. 22, 180, 275――iv. 61 _bis_, 124, 125
  DAVIDSTOWE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of living,
    incumbent, land tax, i. 304. History of St. David, barton of
    Davidstowe 305. By Tonkin, St. David. By Editor, his history more
    at large 305. Impropriation of tithes, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 307
  Davie, John, iii. 387
  ―――― of Burnuhall, i. 147 _bis_, 148
  ―――― of Orleigh, Charles, i. 380. Account of his wife, ib.
  Davies, Henry, i. 282 _bis_.――Henry, iii. 6. Henry, great uncle to
    the Editor 307. Rev. George, Rector of Perran Uthno 307 _bis_.
    Rev. John, ditto 306, 307. Miss 429. Family 35, 47,
    216.――Catherine, the Editor’s aunt, iv. 165. William 55.――Family,
    ii. 170, 218, 304
  Davies of Bosence, i. 360. Catherine 360, 362. Elizabeth 362, 363.
    Henry 360 _bis_, 361, 365. John 360 _bis_, 362 _bis_. Mary, ib.
    Philippa, ib. William 361 _bis_. Arms 361. Crest 365. Monuments at
    St. Earth 361
  ―――― of Burnewall, in Buryan, Christopher bought Noye’s title to the
    Lanow estate, but constrained to compromise with the Earl of Bath,
    pleaded his own cause to the admiration of the court, ii. 334
  ―――― of Canonteign, Devon, Thomas, iii. 269
  ―――― of St. Earth, Catherine, i. 376.――William, ii. 34.――John and
    his daughter, iii. 159. William 145, 159
  ―――― of Gear, i. 364
  Davis, Christopher, i. 141, 144 _bis_. Henry 144. John 292. Arms
    144.――Mr. and Dr. late of Plymouth, ii. 111. John 352.――Rev. John,
    iii. 351
  Davis’s British Lexicon, i. 120
  Davy, Sir Humphrey, i. 385――ii. 218――iii. 48, 94. Anecdote of 94.
    His life by Dr. Paris 95.――His grandfather, an architect, ii. 32.
    Rev. C. W. 270.――Family, iii. 48, 94
  ―――― of St. Cuthbert, Mr. and Mrs. and family, iii. 317
  Dawnay of Cowick, Yorksh., Sir John, and arms, iii. 438
  Dawney of Sheviock, Emelyn, i. 63, 64 _bis_. Sir John 63.――Emelyn,
    iii. 436, 437, 438. Henry 438. John 437. Sir John 436. Nicholas 437,
    438 _ter._, 439. William 437. Mr. built the church, and Mrs. the
    barn 439. Family 436 _bis_, 439. Arms 437
  Dawson, the Right Hon. G. R. iv. 143. J. R. Dean of St. Patrick’s,
    furnished the Editor with information 141, 143. Captain 31
  Day of Judgment, Latin prize poem upon, ii. 154
  ―――― John and Peter, i. 216.――Dorothy, iii. 145, 159. John 159. Rev.
    John of Little Petherick 334. Peter 145
  ―――― of Tresuggan, i. 225
  Daye, i. 298
  Dayman, Rev. Charles, i. 343――ii. 233
  ―――― of Flexbury, Rev. Charles, iii. 351. John 353. Family 351
  Dead, custom of saluting, i. 183
  Deadman Point, ii. 106, 113, 115. Its Geology 115
  Dean, rural, oath of, ii. 307
  ―――― General, and his death, ii. 26
  Deane’s Essay on Dracontia, i. 141
  Decumani, i. 234
  Deer park, ii. 402
  Deerso river, its source, iv. 237
  Defoe’s Tour through Great Britain, ii. 346
  Degembris manor, iii. 269
  Degemue in Kerrier, iii. 422 _bis_
  Delabole quarry, i. 118. Slate 343
  Delahay, i. 262
  De la Mare, Peter, iv. 28
  Delcoath, i. 128, 165 _bis_.
  Delian, St. history of, i. 382
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 328
  Dell, Rev. Henry, of Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 403, 405. Rev. John ditto 403
  Delphic oracle, iii. 162
  Delves, Sir Bryant Broughton, iii. 9
  Delyan, St. Landaff cathedral dedicated to, ii. 65
  Democracy vindicated, ii. 77
  Denham, Judge, iii. 144. Miss 191. Heir of the family 140
  Denham’s town, iii. 361
  Denis, Great and Little, i. 39
  ―――― St. i. 386, 392
  ―――― St. abbey, near Paris, ii. 169
  ―――― St. church, iii. 198
  DENIS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, land tax, patron, incumbent, i. 308. Saint’s history, ib.
    Church 309. Robert Dunkin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 310
  Denmark, George Prince of, called George Drinkall, ii. 15
  Dennis family, ii. 313――iii. 23. Rev. Mr. 171
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 143. Edward 320. George, ib.
  ―――― of Orleigh, i. 171
  ―――― of Trembath, Alexander, his character, and Miss, iii. 33
  ―――― St. name explained, iv. 313
  ―――― chapel, iii. 453
  ―――― parish, i. 212, 227, 341――iii. 58, 180, 207, 391, 395, 402, 448
    _bis_, 450 _ter._, 453
  ―――― rectory, i. 72
  Dennis, St. vicarage, iii. 448, 451, 453
  ―――― in Branwell, iii. 202
  Dennithorne, Nicholas, ii. 402
  Densill, account of, iii. 147
  ―――― barrow, iii. 147
  ―――― Alice and John, iii. 133
  ―――― of Densill, Alice, and Anne, iii. 147. John 147 _bis_. Serjeant
    John ibid. Thomas, and family 147
  ―――― of Philley, Devon, Rich. iii. 148
  Derby, lofty tower at, iii. 363
  Despatch transport, lost returning from Spain, ii. 325
  Devereux, Robert, Earl of Essex, iv. 185
  Devil’s coyts, i. 220
  Devon county, i. 113, 168, 170, 327, 334, 342――ii. 19, 71 _bis_, 77,
    109, 110 _bis_, 115, 122, 137, 149, 177, 293, 340, 413, 415,
    417――iii. 56, 254 _bis_, 256, 279, 336――iv. 39 _bis_, 40 _bis_,
    125.――Part of, iii. 457.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――Romantic scenery
    of, and dunstone prevalent in, ii. 88. Perkin Warbeck marched into
    188. Cornish rebels enter 195. Made prisoners in 197. Blessing
    proclaimed in all its churches for the builders of Bideford bridge,
    to which most families of note contributed 341. Donne’s map of 221.
    Granite in, iii. 432. Divided from Cornwall 104. Lord Clinton
    removed to 230. Werrington parish in 460.――Many gentlemen’s sons of,
    educated at Wike St. Mary, iv. 134. Charles 1st marched through 185
  ―――― bishops of, iii. 415
  ―――― member of parliament for, Sir T. D. Ackland, iii. 271
  ―――― sheriffs of, ii. 43, 130 _bis_, 196, 341 _bis_.――Thomas
    Arundell, iii. 141. John Cheyney 116.――William, John, and John de
    Cheyney, iv. 43.――James Chudleigh, ii. 189.――Sir John Damerell,
    iii. 60. Stephen Durneford 101, 141. Sir Peers, Peter, and Sir
    Rich. Edgecumbe 103. Sir Richard Edgecumbe 101, 103. Richard Hals
    and William Wadham 116
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 350, 438 _bis_――A faggot belonging to, ii.
    410.――Ordgar, iii. 384, 460; and Elphrida his Countess, iv.
    6.――Ordulf, iii. 385. Courtenay, Edward Hugh 10th, i. 63.――Edward
    11th, and Edward 12th, iii. 436.――Edward 12th, or the blind, Edward
    13th.――Edward 16th, i. 64.――Edward 16th, ii. 189.――William 17th,
    Edward 18th.――Thomas, i. 64――iii. 350 _bis_
  Devonport, i. 266
  Devynock, i. 172
  Dewen of Marazion, Alice, iii. 54
  Dewer, Captain, ii. 219
  Deweston, ii. 430
  Dewin, Mr. ii. 83
  De Witt’s engagement with Blake, ii. 25
  Deza, Donna Giovanna, i. 311
  Diamond, history of the Pitt, i. 68. Weight, drawing of it, worn by
    the Kings of France in their hat, stolen at the Revolution, but
    recovered, placed by Napoleon between the teeth of a crocodile in
    the handle of his sword 69
  Diana, shrine makers of, ii. 53
  Dictionnaire Historique, i. 111
  Dictionary, first Latin and English, written by Sir Thomas Elliot,
    ii. 66
  ―――― Holwell’s Mythological, Etymological and Historical, iii. 171
  Digby, Col. iv. 186. Lord, combat of his troop with Straughans ibid.
  Dilic, St. i. 2
  Dillington, Dorothy, iii. 346
  Dillon, Rev. Robert, ii. 123
  Dinah’s cave, iii. 282
  Dinam, Geoffrey de, ii. 415 _bis_
  Dinant, Oliver de, i. 168 _bis_, 170
  Dinas, Little, promontory and fortification, its siege, i. 40
  Dingle, Miss, iii. 65
  Dinham bridge, i. 168
  ―――― family, i. 349. Charles 170. John _quin._ and Josce 168. Lady
    Elizabeth 170. Galfred de 168. Jane Lady Zouch, Joan Lady Arundell
    and Elizabeth Lady FitzWarren 170 _bis_. Margaret Lady Carew 170 and
    171. Arms 170.――Lanhearn descended lineally from, iii.
    150.――William, iv. 45. Family 62
  ――――’s land, iii. 41
  Dinnavall quarry, iv. 45
  Dinsull, ii. 172
  Dioclesian, Emperor, i. 52. His fortune told by a Druid 192.――St.
    Alban martyred under, ii. 64
  Diodorus Siculus, ii. 4, 20
  Dion, ii. 162
  Diosma ericoides, iv. 183
  Diploma of D. C. L. from Oxford University, iii. 50
  Dirford castle, iv. 228
  Disne, Le, river, ii. 64
  D’Israeli, ii. 78. His Commentaries, his Eliot, Hampden, and Pym 78
  Dissenters, their contest with the establishment for Proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Divine Legation, iii. 69
  Divinity, James’s introduction to, iii. 155
  Dix, Rev. E. of Truro, iv. 92
  Dobbins, Mr. iii. 162
  Doble, John, iii. 185
  Dock, iv. 33
  Doddridge’s History, iii. 28.――Of the Duchy of Cornwall, ii.
    404.――Of Wales and Cornwall, (Sir John,) iv. 8
  Dodman point, ii. 330
  Dodson, Robert, iii. 358.――Family, i. 221
  ―――― of Hay, i. 411. Arms 412
  ―――― of London, i. 412
  Dogherty family, ii. 362
  Doidge, Rev. Mr. of Tallant, iv. 23
  Dolben, Mr. iii. 17.――Mr. Justice, appointed to Cornwall, his
    administration of the law a happiness to the county, ii. 52.
    Petition to Charles II. against him 53. His name struck off the
    commission 54
  Dole abbey, in Franche Comté, iii. 281
  ―――― Sampson, Archbishop of, iii. 336
  Dolichos lignosus, iv. 181
  Domesday, ii. 379
  ―――― Book, ii. 51, 70, 169, 175, 259, 299, 315, 319, 384――iii. 22,
    27, 44, 46, 64, 74, 78, 101, 110, 111, 114, 117, 118, 124, 127, 139,
    143, 161, 163, 169, 175, 182, 190, 195, 196, 198, 237, 261, 276, 291
    _bis_, 345, 349, 352, 365, 391, 393, 400, 402, 421, 422, 441, 451,
    456, 461――iv. 1, 6, 12, 15, 19, 20, 39, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    67, 68, 70, 81, 93 _bis_, 94, 96, 99, 102, 110, 115, 117, 118 _bis_,
    124, 128, 137, 139, 153, 155, 160, 161
  Domesday Roll, ii. 48, 62, 86, 92, 94, 106, 151, 155, 226, 253,
    320――iv. 184
  ―――― Survey, iv. 62, 93
  ―――― Tax, ii. 36, 50, 59, 80, 129, 141, 145, 229, 232, 251, 257,
    273, 275, 291, 315, 332, 335, 340
  Dominica, St. i. 315
  Dominican abbey, Dublin, iv. 147
  ―――― chapel and friary at Truro, iv. 73
  ―――― friars, iv. 73. Walter de Exeter said to be one 111
  Dominicans, i. 176, 312. _See Friars_
  Dominick, St. i. 175 _bis_. De Gusman 310, 315. His history 311
  ―――― St. parish, i. 151, 153――ii. 309, 364, 375――iii. 161, 167, 345
  DOMINICK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint’s
    history, i. 311. Dominican friars 312. Halton ibid. By Tonkin,
    Crockaddon 313. Pentilly 314. Halton, the Saint, a Female 315. By
    the Editor, Francis Rous, Charles Fitz-Geoffrey, Sir James Tillie
    315. New mansion at Pentilly, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 316
  Domitian, i. 198――iv. 165, 167
  Doncaster, John, ii. 189
  Doniert, i. 178, 179 _bis_, 180 _ter._, 182 _bis_, 195 _ter._
  Donne, Benjamin, ii. 221
  ――――’s Map of Devonshire, ii. 221
  Donneny manor, iv. 127
  Donnithorne, i. 8
  Dorchester, St. Berimus, Bishop of, ii. 60
  ―――― Oxon, i. 407
  Dorset, i. 334
  ―――― county, H. Bankes, M.P. for, iii. 221
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Duke of, iii. 294
  ―――― Thomas Grey, Marquis of, iii. 350
  Dosmeny pool, i. 178, 189.――By Leland, iv. 285
  Dotson of Roskymer, Henry, iii. 324 _bis_, 325. John 325 _bis_
  Douay college, iii. 143 _bis_
  Dovenot, i. 168
  Dover castle, ii. 10
  ―――― town, ii. 10, 76――iii. 10.――A cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged and
    made a packet station 45.――Change of its name, iii. 29. High water
    at 98
  Dower park, account of, ii. 336
  Doweringe, Rev. Mr. ii. 291
  Down hills, ii. 121
  Downes, Rev. Mr. i. 129.――Mr. ii. 119, 120 _quat._
  Downevet borough, ii. 420
  Dozmere, account of, and stories relating to, iii. 265. Etymology 266
  Dracæna australis, iv. 181
  Dracontia, Essay on, i. 141
  Drake, Sir Francis, i. 315――ii. 21――iii. 460――iv. 86.――John, ii.
    195.――Z. H. iii. 256
  ――――’s island, iii. 108
  Dranna point, ii. 331
  Draper, i. 283
  Drayns, East, manor of, in St. Neot and St. Cleere, iii. 359
  Drayton’s Polyolbion, App. 8, iv. 293 to 308, and notes from 308 to 311
  Drew, Mr. iv. 34.――Miss, i. 39
  ――――’s Teignton, Devon, ii. 98
  Drift, account of, iii. 427
  Drillavale quarry, iv. 45
  Drineck, ii. 260
  Drinking at St. Colomb, i. 219
  Drinkwater, Rev. Mr. i. 398
  Drogo, iii. 33
  Druid, female, prophesies Dioclesian’s elevation to the throne, i. 192
  Druidical antiquities of the Scilly islands, iv. 175
  ―――― basons, i. 185, 186 _bis_, 187, 190. A very large one 191
  ―――― learning, iii. 52
  ―――― monument, i. 196
  ―――― residence, fine site for, i. 192
  Druids, i. 183――iii. 49, 290, 385.――Etymology and account of, i. 192
  Druis, Celtic, i. 192
  Drummond, Lady, i. 313.――Sir Adam and his daughter, iii. 201. Sir
    William 200.――Sir William and his two daughters, iv. 156
  Drus, British and Greek, i. 192
  Dry tree, iii. 127, 138
  Dublin, i. 295 _ter._――iv. 146
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 143 _bis_. Archbishops of 146. Michael de
    Tregury, Archbishop of 138. Taken prisoner at sea 146. Few records
    of the prelates and dignitaries 144
  ―――― city and diocese, iv. 146
  ―――― St. Patrick’s church at, iv. 138, 146
  Dubritius, St. Bishop of Landaff, i. 382
  Du Cange, ii. 369.――His Glossary, iii. 389
  Duchy Exchequer, iv. 99. Leonard Lovice, receiver general 41
  ―――― officers, negotiation of Helston with, ii. 164
  Duckenfield, Captain, monument to, ii. 325
  Duckworth, Admiral, iii. 440
  Duddowe, i. 243
  Dugdale, ii. 163, 344――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101.――His Baronage, ii.
    91――iii. 27.――His Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 217, 300――ii. 62, 96,
    208――iii. 78, 232, 332, 372, 446――iv. 6, 26, 100, 105.――His short
    view, &c. iii. 26. His Warwickshire 317
  Dukas’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Dulo parish, ii. 298, 391, 394.――Road to Hessenford from, iv. 30. Or
    Duloe, ii. 397――iii. 245, 253, 291, 302, 347
  DULO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 316. Patrons, incumbent, landtax, rector,
    story of a Rev. Mr. Forbes, new vicarage house 317. Death of Rev.
    Mr. Fincher, council against lay impropriation, Trewergy 318.
    Tremada, Westnorth 319. Trenant, Trewenn 320. By Tonkin, value of
    benefice, Trenant, ib. By Editor, etymology from Archbishop Usher,
    and Bond’s Sketches of East and West Looe, history of St.
    Theliaus, Treworgy, Trenant 321. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 322
  Dundagell castle, i. 328, 329, 330 _bis_, 332. Account of 323
  ―――― manor, i. 322――iv. 43
  ―――― parish, i. 372, 404――ii. 259――iii. 81――iv. 20, 42, 66, 94
  ―――― Robert de, i. 323
  DUNDAGELL or TINTAGELL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, manor, ancient name, i. 322. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, landtax, market, fair, Trebennen, borough arms, court
    leet, representatives, family of Dundagell, castle 323.
    Consecrated well and chapel, Pendew, Porth Horne, rock arch over
    the sea 324. Lines on the castle, and on King Arthur 325. Arthur’s
    history, King Uter’s surname and arms, his victories 326. Love for
    Igerne 327. Merlin procures him admittance to her 330. Marries
    her, his death 332. Merlin’s prophecy of Arthur 333. Arthur’s
    victories over the Saxons 334, and Romans 335. Round Table, his
    arms 336. Death, and discovery of his tomb 337. Edward Third’s
    Knights of the Round Table 339. By Editor, remarks on Arthur and
    the castle 340. Impropriation of benefice, two other chapels 341.
    Print of Arthur by Caxton, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase. Kneighton’s Kieve 343
  Dundee, ii. 66
  Dunecheine, name for Dundagell, i. 322, 324
  Dunechine, i. 342
  Dungarvon, fishing nets introduced from, ii. 264
  Dungeness, sea fight before, iii. 26
  Dungerth, i. 182 _ter._ His monument 179 _bis_, 184 _ter._, 195.
    Inscription of 180. Vault under it 181. Inscription 180, 182
  Dunheved church, iii. 458
  Dunhevet castle, ii. 417, 427
  ―――― town 417. Inhabitants drawn to Launceston 418
  Dunkin, Robert, i. 310――iii. 83
  Dunkirk, ii. 55――iv. 157
  Dunmeer, i. 368
  Dunscombe, Mr. iii. 125
  Dunstan, St. iii. 415.――Wished to make St. Udith Queen, iv. 94
  ―――― St. parish, London, iii. 251
  Dunstanvill, i. 36
  Dunstanville barons from Henry I. to Henry III. ii. 249. Barony
    conferred 249
  ―――― Reginald de, ii. 239.――Earl of Cornwall, iv. 169.――Family, ii. 239
  ―――― Lord de, i. 114, 137, 164.――ii. 23――iii. 239, 353, 386――iv.
    107, 136, 154.――Godrevy, his property, ii. 150. Memoir of 243.
    Joined Lord North’s party 245. Headed the Cornish miners in
    defence of Plymouth, and created a baronet 246. French revolution
    247. Created a peer, his connexion with the Plantagenets, and
    private character 249. Marriages and issue 250.――His marriage,
    iii. 230. His death, and public monument 389.――His edition of
    Carew, i. 241, 258, 341――ii. 45, 109, 120, 294, 394 _bis_, 398,
    409, 419――iii. 28, 39, 79, 81, 91, 102, 150, 171, 179, 279, 287,
    302, 388, 393――iv. 132
  Dunster, Reginald de Mohun, Lord of, iii. 293
  Dunstone prevalent in Cornwall and Devon, ii. 88
  ―――― rock, iii. 256.――Rocks, ii. 234
  Dunveth, i. 117
  Duporth, iv. 104
  Durant, family, iii. 270.――Family and heir, iv. 16
  Dureford, monastery at, iii. 206
  Durham county, i. 183, 289, 290
  ―――― bishops of, Ralph Flambard, and William Carilepho, i. 290
  ―――― bishopric, transferred from Lindisfarne, i. 290. Immunities
    curtailed and restored 291. Arms of 291
  Durneford family, iii. 107
  ―――― of Devon, Stephen and Miss, iii. 101, 102. Family 101
  ―――― of Stonehouse, i. 347
  Durnford, Stephen, iii. 374
  Dutch fleet, engagements of with English, ii. 25, 26, 28
  ―――― man of war, a fight with, ii. 41
  ―――― ships driven into Falmouth harbour, ii. 6
  ―――― squadron, iii. 287
  ―――― war, ii. 27, 28, 42, 94, 267.――Wars, iii. 186
  Duvaura dependens, iv. 181
  ―――― undulata, iv. 181
  Duverdier’s History of the Swiss Cantons, iii. 186
  Dye, St. history of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― chapel of, ii. 131, 133
  ―――― town of, ii. 131
  Dynas castle, iv. 228
  Dynham family, i. 167, 168 _ter._ John 169 _bis_. Lord 170.――Galfrid
    de, iv. 156

  Eadbald, King of Kent, iii. 281
  Eadnothus, bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  ―――― brother of Alpsius, Duke of Devon and Cornwall, ii. 420
  ―――― Bishop of Devon, iii. 415, 416
  Eagle vicarage, ii. 363
  ―――― white, Cornish for, i. 120
  Earle, Mr. i. 296
  EARME, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, saint’s history, i.
    393. Tregaza, Godolphin blowing house 394. The cat eating the
    dolphin 395. Truthan, Treworgan, Treworgan Vean, Innis 396. Trehane
    397. By Tonkin, Cargaul, Jago family 397. Killigrew 398. Ennis,
    Polglace 399. Trevillon 400. By Editor, advowson, Mr. Wynne
    Pendarves 400. Polsew 402. Treworgan, Truthan, Killigrew, statistics
    403. Geology by Dr. Boase 404
  Earth, St. bridge, i. 360
  ―――― St. church, i. 345, 377
  ―――― parish, ii. 169――iii. 5, 46, 125
  EARTH, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land-tax,
    Trewinard, i. 344. Arrest of a member of parliament, murder by Mr.
    Trewinard 345. Fatal duel 346. Other murders by gentlemen,
    Trenhayle 347. Trelizike 348. Gurlyn 349. By Tonkin, name,
    Trewinard 349. Trelisick 350. By the Editor, name, church,
    monuments in it 351. Vicars 353. Curious story of Mr. Symonds 354.
    Glebe, vicarage house, churchyard, bridge widened by the Editor,
    adjoining parishes 355. Trewinnard 356. Improved by Mr. Hawkins,
    artificially supplied with a stream of water 358. Trelisick 359.
    Tredrea, Bosence, Roman intrenchments 360. Monuments of the Davies
    family 361. Perthcolumb Gear, Tregethes, copper mill at Trewinnard
    364. Genlyn, Treloweth, tin smelting house there, Lamb tin 365.
    Statistics, feast, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, school 366
  East Angles, Sigebert King of, ii. 284
  East, hundred, i. 151, 153, 377――ii. 226, 229, 250, 361, 363, 364,
    377, 417――iii. 1, 37, 40, 41, 43, 101, 161, 167, 335, 345, 371, 374,
    436, 437 _bis_, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 50, 59 _bis_, 63 _bis_, 68,
    69, 376
  ―――― India Company, ii. 227
  ―――― Indies, ii. 100
  ―――― Saxons, Sebert King of, ii. 284
  ―――― St. pool, ii. 281
  Eastbourne, Sussex, iii. 33
  Eastcot village, iii. 255
  Eastwellshire hundred, i. 310, 409――ii. 59, 309.――Etymology, i. 32
  Eata, St. bishop of Lindisfarne or Hexham, history of his see, iv.
    42. His death 43
  Eath, St. parish, ii. 332
  Eaton, Rev. D. iii. 463, 464
  Ebbingford, Thomas de Waunford, Lord of, iv. 13
  ―――― or Efford manor, account of, iv. 16. By Leland 258
  Ebchester, i. 183
  Ebiorite heresy, iii. 59
  Ecclesiastical courts, iii. 155
  Ecclesis Gwenwan, i. 321
  Echard, ii. 78
  Echium grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― nervosum, iv. 182
  Eddystone lighthouse, its situation, iii. 375. History of the first
    376. Of the second, fire, accident from the burning lead 377.
    History and description of the present 378
  ―――― rocks, iii. 376
  Edeston island, iv. 238
  Edgar, King, iv. 93, 97
  Edgecombe of Cuttvyle, Sir Pierce, and Hon. Richard, iii. 374.
    Family 375
  Edgecumbe, Hon. Richard, i. 417. Sir Richard 153, 154, 417, 418.
    William 154.――Peter, ii. 189. Peter sheriff of Devon 235. Sir Peter
    187. Sir Richard 100, 108 _bis_, 115 _bis_, 187. Sir Henry
    Bodrigan’s defence against 115.――Hon. Richard, iii. 374. Sir Richard
    394. Roger 358. Miss 199. Mr. 107.――Hon. Richard, iv. 75.――Family,
    i. 154 _ter._, 157, 421――ii. 362, 393――iii. 190 _bis_, 203――iv. 71,
    136 _bis_, 143, 158. Arms 72
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Richard, ii. 114
  ―――― of Mount Edgecumbe, Sir Richard, ii. 114.――Sir Peers, iii. 102,
    103. Peter 101, 103 _bis_, 104. Sir Peter 104. Sir Piers Lord of
    Cotehele and of East Stonehouse 101. Richard, Richard, Richard,
    Richard 104. Sir Richard 102, 103, 104. Sir Richard favoured Henry
    the 7th’s pretensions 101. His narrow escape and subsequent reward
    102. Built a chapel and was sheriff 103. His struggle with Bodrigan
    for plunder 204. On the winning side at Bosworth 204. Family 101,
    194. History in Carew 104. Arms 103
  Edinburgh, iii. 94
  Editha, St. her early death, self denial, legend of, her mother
    Abbess of Wilton, iv. 96
  Editor, ii. 83, 99, 100. A descendant and heir at law of
    Attorney-general Noye 339. M.P. for Helston 160, 164. On poor law
    committee 159. Remembers an English fleet of 40 sail pursued up the
    Channel by an enemy of nearly double 247. Remembers a cloister at
    St. Bennet’s 387. Has seen an original receipt of a fine for
    non-attendance at the Coronation of James I. 269. Has heard
    traditionary accounts of the plague 271. Is indebted to the Rev. J.
    Smythe for admission to Pembroke College 287. Character he has heard
    of Mr. Knile 267. Mr. K.’s monument stands on his land 268. His
    remembrance of Mr. Pitt 154. His memoir of and friendship for Lord
    de Dunstanville 243, and feelings in writing of him 249. His
    inquiries on the subject of the vessel driven from Charlestown to
    St. Ives 268. His remarks on the superstition, monastic
    institutions, and devastations of the 16th century 425.――The heir of
    Humphrey Noye, iii. 151. His education 96. His age 273. His
    connexion with Sir Humphrey Davy 94. Introduced him to Dr. Beddoes
    251. Raised a subscription for replacing the rocks at Trereen Dinas,
    and Lanyon Cromlech 32. Has printed Keigwin’s translations 288.
    Remembers Sarah Coat, who lived to the age of a hundred and four
    460. Possesses the manor of Lamellin 20. An old receipt 6. A MS. of
    Noye’s 154, and his picture of which he has presented a copy to
    Exeter College 156. Has also the marriage contract of Humphrey Noye
    ibid. and a letter of Mr. J. Trevanion’s 204. Found the form of oath
    for rural deans 307. His visit to Mr. Walker 4. His remarks upon Dr.
    Borlase 49. Upon the Book of Job 69, and on Hugh Peters 71. His
    character of Penzance corporation 92. Remarks on the method of
    making signals 106. On Plymouth breakwater 108. On monasticism,
    popish mummeries 122, 262, 301, 332, 399, 401. On the succession of
    animal and vegetable life 174. On the motives of civil wars 203. On
    etymologies 206. On representation 272. On old age 273. On the
    Lionesse country 331. On Elizabeth’s laws against papists, and on
    the reigns of the Tudors 370. On the purchase of advowsons by a
    society 400. On Hals’s specimen of Homer 420. His character and
    biography of Mr. Whitaker 406.――Possesses a manor in Towednack
    parish, iv. 54. Purchased Trereen Dinas 166. His remarks on the
    alteration of ancient gothic churches, and its cause 103.――His
    mother and residence, i. 360.――His grandfather, ii. 34. And
    great-grandfather 146, 160
  Edles in Kenwen, iv. 73
  ―――― manor, ii. 315. Account of ibid.
  Edmonds, Everard, iv. 77
  Edmondsbury, St. i. 338
  Edmund Earl of Cornwall, iv. 4 _bis_
  ―――― Ironside, i. 211
  ―――― saint and king, i. 407 _bis_
  ――――’s, St. chapel, iii. 317, 318
  Edmunds, Henry, ii. 30
  Edulphus bishop of Exeter, ii. 7
  Edward the elder, king, i. 407――iii. 1, 416
  ―――― the martyr, king, his death, iv. 94
  ―――― the confessor, king, i. 25――ii. 38, 61, 73, 174, 177, 205
    _bis_, 208, 214――iii. 130, 365, 416. Saint 363――iv. 155.――Built St.
    Michael’s church, ii. 202. His charter to it 208. Translated 209.
    Placed a priory of benedictine monks there 208
  Edward 1st, king, ii. 38, 89, 155, 313, iii. 361 _bis_, 384, 394,
    409, 412, 414, _bis_, 15, 26, 44, 56 _bis_, 101, 111, 112, 116, 129,
    132, 165, 214, 230, 245, 254, 257, 261, 277, 284, 291 _bis_, 334,
    336, 339, 345, 347, 349, 352, 354, 372, 374 _bis_, 384, 389, 396,
    398, 403, 405 _bis_, 437, 438, 442, 449, 457――iv. 7, 15 _bis_, 23,
    24, 43 _bis_, 44, 62, 66, 67, 76, 83, 84, 95, 96 _bis_, 102, 112
    _bis_, 118, 119, 128, 129, 139, 140, 153 _bis_, 157 _bis_, 162
    _bis_.――Frequented Helston, ii. 156
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 6, 38, 363, 409, 410――iii. 26, 129, 165, 211, 316, 405
    _ter._――iv. 3, 96
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 4, 6, 38 _bis_, 45, 120, 146, 155, 176, 177, 209, 302,
    316, 336, 341, 409――iii. 15, 27, 56, 60, 65, 79, 115, 129, 130, 133
    _bis_, 140, 199, 200, 212, 270, 316, 323, 372, 381, 405――iv. 6
    _bis_, 8, 13, 21 _bis_, 43, 101, 103, 139, 156, 171
  ―――― 4th, ii. 108 _bis_, 182 _quin._, 183, 185, 186, 188, 191, 209,
    251, 254, 260, 341 _bis_――iii. 116, 141, 147, 168, 211, 247, 270,
    274――iv. 13, 22 _bis_, 43 _bis_, 161.――His commission to punish the
    Foy pirates, ii. 41
  ―――― 6th, ii. 72, 196, 197, 198, 326, 335, 386, 404, 414――iii. 170,
    208, 268――iv. 135
  ―――― the Black Prince, iii. 27――iv. 4, 8. The first duke of
    Cornwall, won his plume at Cressy 72
  Edwards, John, i. 364, 365.――John, iii. 342. Notice of 340. Joseph
    341. Mr. 196. Family, curious tenure of 178
  Edwardsia grandiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― microphylla, iv. 182
  Edwyn, King of Northumbria, iii. 284. His death ibid.
  Efford, iii. 270.――Near Stratton, ii. 184.――Sir J. Arundell removed
    from, iii. 274
  Egbert, King, iii. 322
  Egbright, the 13th King of England or the West Saxons, ii. 310.――His
    victory, iv. 6
  Egerton, Lord, ii. 9
  Egeus, Pro-consul of Rome in Achaia, commanded the crucifixion of
    St. Andrew, iv. 101
  Egid, St. ii. 430
  Eglesderry in Kerrier, iii. 442 _ter._
  Egleshale parish, ii. 340
  Egleshayle church, i. 75, 372. Tower 374
  ―――― of Egleshayle, Matthew, and arms, i. 374
  ―――― parish, i. 234, 351, 372――ii. 151, 332――iii. 64, 74, 237.
    Living of 301
  EGLESHAYLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, patron, incumbent, rector, value of benefice, land tax,
    founder, park, i. 367. Peverell’s crosses, Prior’s cross, Cornish
    proverb, Pencarrow 368. Camp in Pencarrow-park 369. Kestell 370.
    Rudavy Croan 371. Epitaph, Tregleah castle, Killy Biry, Ward bridge
    372. Piers laid on woolpacks 373. Church tower built 374. By Tonkin,
    Pencarrow ibid. Padstow harbour, Croan 376. By the Editor, Wade
    bridge, Pendavy 376. Crowan, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, vicar 377
  ―――― Thomas Longbound, vicar of, i. 373. Vicarage 130
  EGLESKERRY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, i. 377.
    Impropriation, ancient state, manor of Penheale, mathematical school
    at Looe 378. Trelynike 379. By Tonkin, saint, small-pox ibid. By
    Editor, proprietors of Penheale 380. Statistics, vicar, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 381
  Egles Merthyr barton, iii. 180. Tenement 209
  Eglesros or Egles Ross parish, ii. 275――iii. 402
  Eglos Crock church, ii. 256
  Egloskerry parish, i. 197, 381――ii. 377, 399, 430――iii. 38, 457,
    461――iv. 50, 51, 59, 60 _quat._, 63 _bis_, 64, 68, 69
  Egypt, iii. 187.――The Saracens in possession of, ii. 37. Deserts of 279
  Eldon, Lord Chancellor, iii. 253, 290, 351
  Eleanor, Queen, i. 339
  Eledred, St. i. 200
  Elementa Logicæ, ii. 33
  Elerchy manor, ii. 50――iii. 404――iv. 116 _bis_. House 118, 121
  Elerci, several places in Gallia so called, iv. 116
  Elercky parish, iv. 116, 118 _quater._ Etymology 118
  Elerky and Ruan Lanyhorne in Ruan and St. Veryan, ii. 359.――Manors,
    iii. 406
  ―――― mills, iv. 119
  Elford, Miss, iii. 66.――Family, i. 347, 387――ii. 293, 427
  ―――― of Roach and St. Dennis, iv. 161 _bis_
  Eliot, Mr. i. 321.――Edward Craggs, ii. 75. Rev. John 354. Sir John
    77 _quin._, 78 _quat._ Richard 75. Sir Richard 71. Sir Thomas 66,
    71. Walter 71. Lord 78, 86. Family 66, 252. Its origin 66.――John,
    and Sir John the celebrated patriot, iii. 39, 337. Rev. Robert,
    fifty years rector of Pillaton 346.――Family, iv. 12, 127
  ―――― of Berks, ii. 66
  ―――― of Cambridgeshire, ii. 66
  ―――― of Devon, ii. 66
  ―――― of Port Eliot, John, i. 379.――Daniel, ii. 71. Edward 70, 71,
    72, 77. John 71. Sir John 66, 70, 71 _bis_. Katharine and Nicholas
    71. Richard 70 _bis_, 71.――Lord Eliot, iii. 39. William his son 39, 337
  Elizabeth, popular abbreviation of, iv. 120
  ―――― daughter of King Edward 1st, i. 63
  ―――― Queen, i. 344――ii. 6, 7 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 56, 66, 68, 69 _bis_,
    213, 215, 227, 233, 293, 314, 341 _bis_, 342, 344, 414――iii. 8, 16,
    20, 67, 103 _bis_, 104, 105, 119, 134, 199 _bis_, 212, 234, 242,
    287, 293, 294, 311, 317 _bis_, 318, 325 _quater_, 357, 358 _bis_,
    360, 369, 370, 445, 463 _bis_――iv. 20, 41, 107, 172. Gave a charter
    to Truro 73
  ―――― Princess, iii. 27
  Ellery of St. Colomb Major, marshal of Lydford castle, iii. 184
  Ellett, i. 274. John 272
  Elliot, ii. 232
  Elliott, Mrs. sister of Ralph Allen, Esq. i. 58. Rev. St. John
    12.――Miss, ii. 33.――Miss, niece of Mr. Allen of Bath, iv. 89
  Ellis, George, i. 271, 275.――John, iii. 429. Pascoe 83. Arms 429,
    432. Family monuments 432
  ―――― of Bray, John, ii. 282
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  Elmsworthy, account of, ii. 347
  Elphrida, Countess of Devon, iv. 6
  Elvan courses, i. 159――iv. 5
  Ely, Francis Turner, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Emelianus, i. 197
  Emendationes in Suidam, ii. 265
  Enador parish, iii. 267
  Enchanted Lovers, a pastoral, iv. 97
  Endelient, i. 1
  Endellion or St. Endellyan parish, ii. 332, 340――iii. 179, 237,
    241――iv. 44, 47
  Eneas, i. 153
  ENEDELLYAN, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity,
    stunt, his history, i. 382. Value of benefice, Roscurok, Trefreke,
    Tresongar, Pennant, Cheny 383. By Tonkin, Roscarrake, Trefreke 384.
    By Editor, Port Isaac, church, rectory, and prebends 384. Church,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 385
  Enedor, St. parish, i. 209, 212――ii. 353, 355, 356――iv. 20, 140
  Enedor-Bosithney borough, iii. 81
  England, ii. 373, 407――iii. 450――iv. 172.――Miserable state of, ii.
    375. French invasion of 40. Peace of France and Holland with 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. St. Mellitus preached in 288. Some
    Paleologi may still be living in 369. Theodore’s settlement in 370,
    372, 373. Duke of Bracciano came to 371. Greek language fashionable
    in 373.――its water communication interrupted by chalk hills, iii.
    10. First impropriation of benefices in 114. St. Sennan, the most
    westerly point in 431.――Copyholds in, iv. 54. Lands in, given to
    foreign monasteries 99. Wars between France and 144. St. Dunstan
    wished to make St. Udith queen of 94
  ―――― crown of, iv. 145
  ―――― King of, ii. 146――iv. 7
  ―――― kings of, ii. 259, 422――iii. 168, 442――iv. 6.――Their eldest son
    to be Duke of Cornwall for ever, ii. 422.――Arms, iv. 71
  ―――― and France, Perkin Warbeck proclaimed King of, ii. 188
  English channel, ii. 358, 398, 409
  ―――― crown, iii. 451, 452
  ―――― Etymological Dictionary, iii. 148
  ―――― fleet encounters the Dutch, ii. 25. Refuses quarter, and
    defeats the enemy 26. Forced into Falmouth harbour ibid. Dismissed
    without pay 29. Detained at home 246. Cruizing while combined fleets
    were in Falmouth sound 246
  ―――― language, iv. 126. Life of Guy, Earl of Warwick, in old 113
  ―――― men, iv. 99. On one side of Tamar 40. Fought against the Turks,
    ii. 371
  ―――― romance, ii. 214
  ―――― squadron captured Cadiz, iii. 287
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Enmour, island of, iv. 171
  Ennis, account of, i. 399――ii. 218
  Enny, St. chapel, and probably well, iii. 426
  Ennys, Samuel, iii. 327
  Enodoc, St. iii. 240
  Enodor, St. iii. 268
  ―――― parish, i. 160――ii. 270
  ENODOR, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, saint, his advice to
    Augustus, Carvinike, i. 386. Pencoll, Gourounsan, Trewheler,
    flatness of the country, fall of the church tower, mines, two rivers
    387. By Tonkin, hundred, history of St. Athenodorus, Summercourt,
    Penhele, and Fraddon villages, fairs, Michel village 388. Members of
    parliament, borough system, Reform Bill 389. Illustrious
    representatives of Michell, right of voting 390. Reform election,
    Pencoose, Trewhele, Treweere 391. Gomronson, Boswallow, Michell
    manor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 392
  Ensham, abbot of, i. 233
  Ensleigh cottage, i. 26
  Entrenchment, Roman, at Bosence, i. 360
  Eny water, ii. 427 _bis_
  Enys, ii. 93
  ―――― John, ii. 97. Samuel 31, 97, 100, 317. Family and etymology of
    name, by Tonkin 97
  ―――― of Enys, John, ii. 93, 243. J. S. 57, 99, 243. Built a new
    house at Enys 100.――Mr. and his character, iii. 38. Family 332
  Ephesus, ii. 53
  Epigrams, Greek, anthology of, iv. 87
  Epimachus, St. ii. 81
  Epitaph of Richard Carew of Anthony, with observations upon it,
    Appendix XIV. iv. 378
  Ercedekne, Sir John l’, iii. 373
  Ercildowne, Thomas of, ii. 308
  Ergan, St. i. 351
  Erica ciliaris, iii. 230
  ―――― vagans, iii. 173, 260――iv. 180
  ―――― A multiflora, grows on all the uncultivated serpentine rock in
    Cornwall, ii. 331
  Ericornus fragrans, iv. 182
  ―――― punctata, iv. 181
  Eriobotrya japonica, iv. 182
  Eriocephalus africanus, iv. 182
  Erisey barton, iii. 416.――Account of, ii. 116
  ―――― Miss, i. 305.――Richard, ii. 6. Family 116, 117, 170, and arms
    116.――De, George, iii. 417. James 419. Richard 383. Richard, story
    of 417. Miss 135, 417. Mr. anecdote of 418. Family 258, 416, 419.
    Arms 419
  ―――― of Brickleigh, Devon, James, iii. 417
  ―――― of Trethewoll, James, i. 408
  Erisy, i. 125, 136 _bis_
  Erme, St. church, i. 402.――Monument to Dr. Cardew in, iv. 85
  ―――― St. parish, i. 207――ii. 2, 93, 146, 353, 355, 356――iii. 354
  ERNEY, ST. parish, part of Landrake, church still existing, Hals’s
    MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, Eagle
    vicarage, Lincolnshire, a daughter to Landrake. By Editor, Trelugan
    manor, Markwell, church entitled to service only once a month, ii.
    363. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Erroll, James Carr, Earl of, iii. 172
  Erth, St. parish, i. 261, 417――ii. 80, 99, 100, 225.――By Leland, iv.
    267――The vicar’s sister, iii. 310
  Ervan, St. church, i. 74
  ―――― St. parish, i. 409――ii. 256――iii. 334, 335
  ERVAN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, i. 404.
    Trenbleigh, discovery of a sepulchral urn there, Treranall 405. By
    Tonkin, Treravall, Trenowith 406. By Editor, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 406
  Ervyn, St. parish, i. 407――iii. 175, 179
  Escallonia rubra, iv. 182
  ―――― montividiensis, iv. 182
  Escott, Thomas, iv. 37
  Escudifer, a French family, i. 210
  Ess family, ii. 153
  Esse, Radolpho de, ii. 119
  Essex county, Henry Marney, sheriff of, iii. 65
  ―――― Earl of, i. 113 _ter._, 114.――The parliamentary general, ii.
    277――iii. 20, 42, 73, 184――iv. 75.――Lord, ii. 411. Marched to
    relieve Plymouth, then into Cornwall, iv. 185. Hemmed in by the
    king’s troops, and obliged to retire alone 187. Followed by his
    principal officers 188. His army 186
  Est Low, by Leland, iv. 279
  Establishment, church, its contest with dissenters for proselytism,
    ii. 133
  Estcot, Richard, ii. 423
  Estwaye, ii. 429
  Ethelbert, King of Kent, ii. 284――iii. 284 _bis_
  ―――― 2nd, King, i. 407
  Ethelburga, Queen of Northumbria, iii. 284 _bis_
  Ethelfleda, wife of Earl Alric, iii. 263
  Ethelfred, King of Northumberland, ii. 284
  Ethelgar, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Ethelnodus, Archbishop, iv. 96
  Ethelred, King, iii. 384――iv. 94
  ―――― 2nd, King, ii. 61
  ―――― King of the Mercians, history of, i. 200 _bis_
  ―――― King of the West Saxons, i. 240. Buried at Wimborne 200
  Ethelwin, St. Bishop of, i. 290
  Ethelwold, Bishop, reproved St. Udith, iv. 93
  Ethelwulf, i. 240
  Ethy, iv. 158
  Eton college, ii. 149. First provost of, iii. 255
  ―――― school, character of, ii. 243, 244
  Eubates, i. 192
  Eure river, Yorkshire, iv. 79
  Eurex in Normandy, iv. 116
  Europe, iii. 310. Tour of 87
  Eury, St. ii. 272
  Eusebius, his Chronicle, iv. 148
  Evall, St. parish, i. 143, 404――iii. 139, 161, 175, 335
  EVALL, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rector, land tax, saint, i.
    407. Trethewoll 408. By Editor, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 409
  Evans of Landrini in Wales, iii. 187
  Eve, i. 409
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 309, 315――iii. 43, 195
  EVE, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient state, manor of
    Trebighe, knights hospitalers, i. 410. Trebigh 411. By Tonkin, Hay,
    name of parish, Trebigh, Bickton. By Editor, saint, church 412.
    Patron, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Eve’s enchantment, ii. 102
  Every, Rev. Nicholas of St. Veep, iv. 114. His death 115
  Evyland manor, ii. 197
  Ewald, St. son of Ethelbert the 2nd, his history, i. 407
  Ewan, St. parish, iii. 18
  Ewe, St. manor, i. 418
  ―――― parish, ii. 105, 115――iii. 198, 202, 207, 451――iv. 117
  EWE, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, i. 413. Patron, incumbent, land tax, name, saint,
    murder of St. Hugh by the Jews, consequent persecution of that
    people 414. Lanhadarn 415. Tregonan, Halliggon, Trevithick 416.
    Treluick, by Tonkin, patron, Pelsew, Trelisick, Precays 417.
    Tregonan, Treworick, St. Ewe manor, Lanewa 418. Heligon, Coran,
    Lanhedrar, Lower Lanhedrar, Trelean, Rosecorla, Trelewick, Tregian,
    Pensiquillis, Lithony, Borew 420. Tregenno, Levalra, Penstruan,
    church 421. Monuments, gentry removed, Tremayne family 422.
    Statistics 423. Rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 424
  Ewny parish, ii. 258 _bis_, 284
  ―――― St. chapel, ii. 284
  Ewyn, i. 212
  Ex river, i. 342 _bis_
  Excavation at Pendeen, ii. 284
  Exceter Brygge, iv. 255
  Exchequer, iv. 20 _bis_
  ―――― court, pleas of the crown in, iii. 442
  ―――― records, iii. 139――iv. 138
  ―――― rolls, iii. 140
  Exeter assizes, ii. 293
  ―――― bishop of, i. 15, 116, 135, 209, 231, 243, 250, 367, 377, 386,
    387, 392, 396, 397, 407, 409――ii. 3, 6, 24, 50, 51 _quin._, 52, 54,
    57, 61, 62, 70 _bis_, 92, 104, 106, 115, 116, 130, 141, 144, 203,
    204, 258, 260, 265, 299, 302, 309, 315――iii. 1 _quat._, 5, 40, 60,
    110, 111, 141, 175, 177, 179 _bis_, 180, 181, 210, 224, 231, 254,
    257, 267, 268, 332, 354 _bis_, 370, 373 _bis_, 428, 441, 443――iv.
    44, 47, 53, 116 _bis_, 152, 164 _bis_, 185.――His royalties proved,
    iii. 2.――William Brewer, his history, i. 130. Peter Courtenay 373.
    Peter Quiril 300. Walter 251.――Bartholomew, ii. 415. Edulphus 7.
    Frederick 58. Leofric 69, 203, 211, 212, 215. Walter 69. Gervase
    Babington 7. William Brewer 95. Walter Brounscomb 96. John Grandison
    96, 341. Keppell 224. Peter Quiril 412. Dr. John Ross 224. Walter de
    Stapledon 143. John Voysey 195. Dr. Ward 4. William Warlewast
    87.――William Brewar, iii. 182. William Buller 301. William Carey 4,
    271. William Cotton 233. Peter Courtenay 181. Dr. Fox 141. John de
    Grandison 2. Hall 79. George Lavington 3. Dr. Redman 142. John Ross
    300. Edmund Stafford 446. Sir Jonathan Trelawnny 295, 296, 297
    _bis_. Robert Warlewast 456, 457. Stephen Weston 46. Thomas 2 _bis_.
    William 2.――Carey, iv. 166. Walter Brounscomb 2
  ―――― bishops, consistory of, iii. 181
  ―――― bishopric of, ii. 95, 113
  ―――― canonry, iii. 460
  ―――― canons of, iv. 66 _bis_――Rev. J. Grant, iii. 40. Rev. John
    Rogers 54, 77, 445. Nicholas 60
  ―――― cathedral, i. 130――ii. 265, 341――iii. 182, 233, 258 _bis_, 309, 373
  ―――― chancellor of, iii. 269.――Rev. John Penneck, ii. 217
  ―――― church, i. 349――ii. 61――iii. 320, 363, 367 at, iii. 309
  ―――― city, i. 59 _bis_, 88 _bis_, 284, 342 _bis_――ii. 76, 189, 190,
    191, 224, 299――iii. 25, 96, 160, 364――iv. 184.――Insurrection in,
    i. 296.――Bishoprics of Cornwall and Kirton removed to, ii. 61, 69.
    Defence of against Perkin Warbeck 189. Cornish rebels march to 195.
    Siege of 196. Relieved 197. Rev. J. Smyth died at 286.――Reduced by
    Lord Berkeley, iv. 14. St. Boniface educated at 126. Isaac’s
    Memorials of 111.――Guildhall of, iii. 309. Members of parliament
    for, John Buller 249. Mr. Kekewitch 19. Charles Trevanion steward of 199
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 71, 111, 116, 130, 141, 143, 144, 221,
    224, 228, 233, 265, 281, 307, 355, 389――iii. 50, 51, 67, 84, 141,
    152, 155 _bis_, 156, 167, 171 _ter._, 408――iv. 144, 145
  ―――― dean of, Edward Trelawney, ii. 230 _bis_――John Arundell, iii. 141
  ―――― dean and chapter of, i. 129, 236, 242, 344, 366――ii. 253, 256,
    275――iii. 171, 177, 179, 257, 258, 313, 316, 332, 426 _bis_,
    427――iv. 66, 67, 118, 121, 157, 159
  ―――― deanery, i. 130
  ―――― diocese, iii. 307.――Its registry, ii. 348――iii. 257, 316, 332
  ―――― Domesday, iii. 353
  ―――― Joseph de, i. 325, 326, 342 _bis_.――Walter de, iv. 111
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― Marquis of, iv. 97.――Henry Courtenay, i. 64, 65――ii. 375
  ―――― name, iii. 458
  ―――― road from, i. 20
  ―――― see of, i. 130, 231, 403――ii. 70――iii. 271, 456. Transferred
    there 415
  Exmouth, i. 169
  “Extent of Cornish acres,” iv. 7, 15, 24, 41, 67, 96, 112, 153, 162
  ―――― of all the parishes in Cornwall from Mr. Hitchins’s
    measurement, Appendix I. iv. 177
  Eyans of Eyanston, i. 142
  Eynesbury, i. 99. Hunts, ii. 263

  Fairfax, i. 44.――Sir Thomas 143――iv. 74
  ―――― the parliamentary general, iii. 81. Hopton’s surrender to 189
  Fairs, custom of displaying a glove, iii. 309
  Fal, Fale, or Fall river, ii. 356――iii. 210, 361, 403, 404. Part of
    it stopped up 405――iv. 117
  Falemuth, by Leland, iv. 288
  Falgenne, ii. 1
  Fall, James, i. 268
  Falmouth borough, iii. 8. United with Penryn 99
  ―――― district, i. 346
  ―――― harbour, i. 26, 359――ii. 1, 24, 48, 275, 276 _bis_, 281 _bis_,
    357――iii. 180, 189, 190, 207, 224, 231, 395, 404――iv. 70, 72, 75,
    84.――Its breadth, extent, numerous arms and traffic, ii. 17.
    Description of 1. Pleasant country around and fine timber 2. Greeks
    fetched tin from 3, a hundred sail may lie at anchor in, without
    seeing each others maintops 3. Rhymes upon 3, 17. One of the best in
    the kingdom 16. Most advantageous station for packets, but inferior
    in accommodation for larger ships to Plymouth or Portsmouth 18.
    Extraordinary story of a boat driven from 320, 324.――Stone sent to
    London from, iii. 63
  ―――― Lord, i. 20, 310――ii. 117. Buys Trelisick 33.――Viscount, iii.
    215 _bis_, 217, 220.――Earl of, ii. 357――iii. 74, 189, 220, 221――iv.
    5.――For six days only, John Robarts, ii. 379.――Lady, iv. 167
  ―――― parish, i. 136――ii. 97. Rocks of St. Feock similar to those in 35
  FALMOUTH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 1.
    Dismembered from Budock 15th Charles Second, Sir Peter Killigrew
    having built a new church 3. Rectory, patron, first rector, church
    consecrated, incumbent, rector’s house and garden, pulpit cloth,
    manors and seats, Arwinike 4. Town 8. Pendennis castle 12. By Tonkin
    15. Arwinick 17. By Editor, harbour, Fox family 18. Irregular trade
    with Lisbon 19. Known to the ancients, various names ascribed,
    British name Smithike, story of Pennycumquick, church dedicated to
    King Charles 20. Town extended northward, new houses convenient,
    beautiful villas, sends in conjunction with Penryn two members to
    parliament, statistics, present rector 23. Geology by Dr. Boase 24
  Falmouth river, iii. 405
  ―――― town, ii. 17――iii. 16, 96, 121, 189, 228, 305――iv. 72,
    229.――Incorporated by Charles Second, contained only five houses
    within the memory of persons living, new name first recorded when it
    had increased to five or six hundred, opposition to John Killigrew
    building the town, ii. 8. Memorial to the king, referred to Sir
    Nicholas Hals, his answer and reasons 9. King approved the project,
    Mr. Killigrew continued his buildings, inhabitants enriched, market
    10. Chief inhabitants, custom house officers, gave the title of earl
    to Charles Lord Berkeley, of viscount to George Fitzroy, son of
    Charles the Second, and to Hugh Boscawen, of Tregothnan 11. Fortunes
    made by irregular commerce 19. Road to 104. From London 344. Road to
    Marazion from 215.――Passage to Truro from, iii. 226. Road from
    Helston to 63. From Truro 304.――Has the same mayor as Truro, iv. 77,
    84. Has more inhabitants than Truro 85
  Fanhope, Lord, iii. 27
  Fann, i. 172
  Fanshaw of Basill, Robert, i. 201
  FARABURY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, ii. 48. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax 49. By
    Tonkin, patron and incumbent ibid. By Editor, smallest parish in
    Cornwall, consolidation of benefice, situation of church, name,
    statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 50
  Farnabie, Thomas, his origin, parentage and history, iv. 86. A
    royalist, monument to in Sevenoak’s church, his works, Boyle’s
    character of him, dedicated his Horace to Prince Henry, and
    favorably received by him 87. Thomas, of London, carpenter, his
    father, and the mayor of Truro his grandfather 86
  Farnham, Nicholas de, i. 290.――Mr. iii. 236
  Farrabury parish, iii. 232, 236
  Fast, ii. 82
  Fasti, iii. 297
  Fatal Curiosity, a tragedy, ii. 102
  Fatwork Mine, i. 227, 230
  Faustine, i. 206
  Fawey, by Leland, iv. 276
  Fayrer, Rev. Joseph, iv. 47
  Felicia, Wife of Guy, Earl of Warwick, iv. 114
  Felicitas, Sancta, iii. 339
  Fenterwarson, village, ii. 405
  Fenton, ii. 1
  ―――― Berran, iii. 322
  ―――― East and West, i. 199
  Fenton Gymps of Fenton Gymps, Joan, iii. 324 _bis_. John, John,
    John, John 323. John 324 _bis_. Ralph 323. Family 323
  ―――― Gymps manor, iii. 323, 324. Account of 322
  ―――― Gymps Veor, iii. 322, 324 _bis_
  ―――― Gymps Vyan, iii. 324 _ter._
  ―――― Vease, iii. 319
  Fentongellan, i. 116
  Fentongimps, i. 243
  Fentongollan family, iii. 208, 209
  ―――― manor, iii. 182, 189, 208, 212 _bis_, 215, 221, 464. Account of
    by Hals 209. By Tonkin 210. By Lysons 214. House 221. Gone 212.
    Hals’s description lengthy 213
  Fentonwoon, account of, ii. 405
  Fentrigan, or Ventrigan Manor, iv. 127
  ―――― downs, races at, iii. 35
  Feock parish, ii. 280, 298, 309――iii. 170, 306――iv. 90
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His wife and children 25
  FEOCK, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patronage, incumbent, land-tax, the
    saint, his figure in the church window, ii. 24. Dwelling of Captain
    Penrose, his history 25. Tregew 30. Cornish tongue spoken there till
    1640, administration of the sacrament in Cornish 31. Lanyon’s
    alms-houses 32. By Tonkin ibid. By Editor, Trelisick ibid.
    Killiganoon 34. Feock Downs, Come to Good, statistics and Geology 35
  Feock’s, St. by Leland, iv. 272
  Ferabery, Feraberry or Ferabury, iv. 66, 68
  Ferint ab Erbyn, ii. 50
  Ferrar, i. 199
  Ferrers, William de, iii. 165. Mr. 134.――Family, i. 151――ii.
    313――iv. 47, 137. De 258. Arms 134
  ―――― of Newton Ferrers, Devon, arms, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, family and arms, iii. 134
  ―――― Earl, Henry and Wakelyn, ii. 89
  Festing, Rev. C. G. R. of Paul, iii. 290
  Feversham church, iii. 114
  Fielding, i. 57
  Figtree, in Gwithian churchyard, ii. 150
  Filley parish, ii. 281, 357――iii. 416
  Finch family, ii. 67.――Judge, iii. 144
  Fincher, Rev. Mr. of Dulo, i. 317 _bis_, 318 _bis_.――Rev. Mr. of
    Veryan, iv. 118
  Finisterre, Cape, iii. 218
  Firbisse, Dudley, iv. 146
  Fish, habits of, ii. 265
  Fishal bay, i. 236
  Fisheries, St. Ives famous for, iii. 261. Especially for pilchards, ib.
  Fitz, ii. 71
  ―――― of Fitzford, i. 347.――Near Tavistock, Sir John, iv. 41
  Fitz-Geoffrey, Charles, i. 315
  Fitzgerald, Lady Anne, and Charles Earl of Kildare, i. 297. Earls of
    Kildare 34
  Fitzhamon, Robert, Earl of Carbill in Normandy, ii. 344
  Fitz-Harry, Reginald, i. 203. Earl of Cornwall 296, 36――iii. 456, 463
  Fitz-John, Margaret and Richard, iii. 149
  Fitz-Roy, George, Viscount Falmouth, and Earl of Northumberland, and
    his arms, ii. 11.――Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, iv. 82 _ter._, 84
    _ter._ A charter from 83
  Fitz Walter, i. 170――ii. 292
  Fitz Warren family, ii. 415
  ―――― Warren, Foulk Bourchier, Lord, i. 170
  Fitz-William, Elizabeth, iii. 303. Sir John 302, 303.――Mabile, iv.
    26. Robert 103 _bis_. Roger 26
  ―――― of Hall, Elizabeth, ii. 409, 410. Gervase, Sir John, _bis_,
    Robert, William, _bis_, 409. Family 409. Arms 410
  Flambard, Ralph, Bishop of Durham, and Lord Treasurer, ii. 290
  Flamborough head, iii. 10
  Flammock, etymology of name, i. 85. Thomas 86 _bis_.――The rebel,
    iii. 388.――Hanged, i. 87. William and his arms 85
  Flammock of Bodmin, i. 387
  ―――― of Gomronson, i. 392. John 387
  ――――’s rebellion, history of, i. 61, 86, 369――ii. 188. His rebels 187
  Flanders, i. 195, 335――iii. 143――iv. 157
  ―――― war, iv. 116
  Flandrensis, Richard and Stephen, i. 104
  Flavell, Rev. T., of Mullion and Ruan Major, monument to, iii. 258
  Fleet prison, iii. 268
  Fleet street, London, iii. 251
  Flemanck, Mark le, i. 86
  Flemen family, iii. 78, 80, 90 _bis_, 94
  Flemming family, descent, i. 104.――Family, ii. 292
  Fleta, ii. 6
  Fletcher, Rev. J. R., of Quethiock, iii. 373
  Flete, Thomas, iii. 247
  Flintshire, ii. 65
  Flood, i. 260
  Flora, goddess, ii. 165
  Floyd, ii. 320――iii. 168, 394, 429 _bis_――iv. 13.――His dictionary,
    iii. 403
  Flushing, in Mylor parish, packet station removed from Falmouth to,
    ii. 11
  ―――― in Nankersy, iii. 227, 231. Description of, improved by Mr.
    Trefusis 227. Now going to decay 228
  Fonnereau, Thomas, his history, ii. 358.――An adventurer, iii. 423
  Fontevrault, in Anjou, i. 341
  Fooda village, ii. 405
  Foot of Treleyassick, Friend, John and Sarah, ii. 55
  Foote, Mr. i. 205.――John, of Truro, ii. 121.――Rev. T., vicar of
    Leskeard, iii. 21.――Samuel, ii. 90 _bis_. His first publication was
    a domestic tragedy 90
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207. John 204 _bis_. Henry 204 _bis_. Samuel 204
  ―――― of Tregony, i. 204
  Foow of Tiverton, i. 172
  Forbes, Rev. Mr. a miser, i. 317
  Forrabury rocks, ii. 274
  Forrester family, iii. 9
  Forschall, Rev. Josiah, iii. 408
  Forster, Rev. Benjamin, account of, and letters published by Mr.
    Nichols, i. 71
  Fortescue, Mr. i. 36, 283. Family 391.――The parliamentary colonel
    and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14. John 185 _bis_. Appointed
    sheriff of Cornwall, assaulted St. Michael’s Mount, but was repulsed
    184. Family 77. Rev. George, of St. Mellian 167.――Rev. George, of
    Pillaton, iii. 348. Hugh, ancestor of Earl Fortescue 216. Sir John,
    Lord Chancellor 191. Martin, acquired Buckland Filleigh by marriage
    148. Miss 163. Mr. 193.――Colonel, iv. 185
  ―――― of Devon, Mr. ii. 251
  ―――― of Fallowpit, Devon, Elizabeth, ii. 339
  ―――― of Filleigh, Hugh, i. 205. Family 387.――Hugh, ii. 68.――Arthur,
    iii. 191
  ―――― of Pencoll, Arthur, i. 387
  ―――― of Vallapit, ii. 190
  Forth, Earl of, iv. 186
  Foss, i. 10
  Fosses Moor, ii. 121
  Fossiliferous slate, i. 343
  Four Barrow Down, ii. 317
  Fowey borough, its franchise, ii. 412.――Represented several times by
    the Rashleighs, iv. 107. Jonathan Rashleigh, M.P. for 101, 107.
    Philip 108. William 109
  ―――― church, i. 52; or Foy, Mr. Treffrye contributed towards its
    erection, ii. 43
  ―――― harbour, ii. 36, 39, 409, 412――iv. 23; or Foye, ii. 88
  ―――― mines and Lanescot Consols, iv. 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 92, 413――iv. 110, 158
  FOWEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax,
    impropriation, ancient chapel at, tutelary saint, her history by
    the Editor, ii. 36. Her body found 37. Church and tower, town,
    franchise, incorporation, form of writ, arms, markets and fairs,
    liberties of the Cinque Ports, had sixty tall line of battle ships
    temp. Edw. 3, 38. Assisted in the siege of Calais, grew rich by
    French prizes, afterwards turned pirates, town burnt and
    inhabitants massacred by the French 39. Again obtained letters 40,
    and relapsed into piracy, insulted King Edward’s messenger, and
    were punished, beauty and security of the harbour, blockhouses, an
    engagement between them and a Dutch frigate 41. Plase, Treffreye
    family, chief inhabitants of the town, hospital endowed by Mr.
    Rashleigh, the history of his fortune 44. By the Editor, remarks
    on the above, feudal supremacy of Tywardreth priory, right of
    voting 45. Manor, Rashleigh family, Mr. Austen’s works, Lysons’s
    account of the repulse of the French 46. Mr. Rashleigh’s
    collections and writings, letter of Thomas Cromwell, the brothers
    Lamb 47. Statistics and Geology 48
  Fowey river, i. 172 _bis_, 179 _bis_――ii. 91, 379 _bis_, 390,
    391――iii. 24 _bis_, 25 _bis_, 121, 262.――Or Foye, iv. 29, 30 _bis_,
    111, 155. Or haven 110.――Choked, iii. 25, 26.――Ford across, iv. 30.
    Source of 237
  ―――― road, iv. 32
  ―――― tower, iv. 229
  ―――― town, ii. 39, 41, 44, 45 _quat._, 48, 400, 411――iii. 20, 26,
    67, 71, 219――iv. 36, 38, 99, 107, 187, 188.――Collector of customs
    at, ii. 47. Once a mere village 412.――Road to, iii. 439.――By Leland,
    iv. 290.――Or Foye, ii. 88. Siege of 40
  ―――― Robert de Cardinam, Lord of, iii. 27
  Fowler, ii. 51
  Fox, the parliamentary captain and governor of Pendennis castle, ii. 14
  ―――― Messrs. their iron-works and character, iii. 305
  ―――― Miss, of Deal, iii. 159
  ―――― of Par, T. W. family, first settled there, removed to Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  ―――― Acts and Monuments, i. 233――ii. 195――iii. 210.――His
    Martyrology, ii. 193
  Foxworthy, Mr. iv. 74
  Foyefenton, i. 199
  Fraddon, i. 388
  Frampton, J. A. iii. 293
  ―――― castle, iv. 228
  France, i. 214――ii. 40, 59, 64, 86, 108 _bis_, 123, 244――iii. 121,
    133, 142, 150, 171, 187, 400, 401, 453, 464――iv. 169.――Court of, i.
    311. Kings of 335.――Peace between England, Holland, and, ii. 43.
    Tobacco sold cheap in 43. Protestants of, are Calvinists 74. St.
    German’s remains restored to 78. Pronunciation in 127. St. Dye a
    native of 133. War with 254.――Lord Hollis ambassador to, iii. 148.
    Fear of invasion from 97. Wars with 439.――Trade of Looe with, iv.
    36. Wars between us and 24, 144
  Francis, St. i. 81 _ter._, 82 _ter._, 175 _ter._, 176 _ter._――iii.
    19.――His history, i. 80. Written by St. Bonaventure 81
  Franciscans, i. 79, 176, 312.――iv. 73. Francis de Exeter said to be
    one 111. (_See Friars_)
  Franks, i. 411
  Freathy family, ii. 252
  Frederick, Emperor, i. 130
  Frederick 2nd King of Castille, i. 311
  French architecture, iv. 140
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― crew, surprise a Cornish party at a Christmas supper, and carry
    them into Brittany, iv. 24
  ―――― family, iii. 276
  ―――― fleet, ii. 245, 246. Seized the town of Marazion 171. Appeared
    in Plymouth sound 246
  ―――― invasion, ii. 40
  ―――― king, ii. 171――iii. 130
  ―――― language, iii. 20
  ―――― men, iv. 99, 157; and Spaniards, sea fight with 21
  ―――― people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― power in India, Pondicherry the chief seat of, iv. 11
  ―――― prizes, ii. 39 _ter._
  ―――― revolution, and Editor’s opinion upon, ii. 247
  ―――― wars, ii. 27, 94, 276――iii. 111, 183――iv. 101.――Edward 3rd’s
    ii. 39. Henry 5th’s 176
  Frendon, Gilbert de, iii. 354
  Friars, Augustine, or Black Friars mendicant, i. 83. Carmelite, or
    of the blessed Lady of Mount Carmel ibid.
  ―――― Cistercian or white, i. 83
  ―――― Dominican, i. 83
  ―――― Franciscan or Cordelier, i. 79, 80, 81, 82, 311 _bis_, or
    mendicant 82. History of their founder 80. Manner of living 82.
    When they came into England, their first convent here at
    Canterbury 83
  Friars of St. Francis of Paula, i. 83
  ―――― Mendicant, number in England, i. 83
  ―――― observants, i. 82
  Frignis, Gregory, mayor of Truro, iv. 77
  Friscobard, Amery of, i. 338
  Froissart, ii. 176
  Frost, William, mayor of Exeter, ii. 189
  Frowick, i. 53
  Froyns, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Frye, Rev. P., of St. Winnow, iv. 159
  Fueran, cell at, iii. 331
  Fulford, Sir Thomas, ii. 189
  ―――― Rev. John, of Probus, iii. 181
  Fuller, i. 108, 109
  ――――’s Gloucestershire, ii. 198
  ―――― Worthies, iii. 277
  Fullford, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Fulton river, or canal navigation, iv. 17
  Funeral monuments, cross-legged figures on, iii. 132
  Furley, Rev. Samuel, of Roach, iii. 396, 399. His character 399
  Furnace, reverberatory, introduced into Cornwall, i. 365
  Furneaux abbey, i. 320
  Furzdon of Devonshire, Mr. iii. 228
  Furze rock, iv. 29
  Fuschia adolphina, iv. 182
  ―――― apetela, iv. 182
  ―――― coccinea, iv. 182
  ―――― conica, iv. 182
  ―――― globosa, iv. 182
  ―――― gracilis, iv. 182
  ―――― maxima, iv. 182
  ―――― robertsia, iv. 182
  ―――― virgata, iv. 182
  Fust castle, iv. 228
  Fyning manor, iii. 206

  Gabriel, angel, i. 367
  Gaisford, Rev. Thomas, Dean of Christ Church, ii. 266
  Gaius, i. 335
  Galfridus Monmouthensis, i. 337, 397――iii. 79.――His Chronicle, ii. 50
  Galilee, iv. 100
  Gall, Henry, married Thomasine Bonaventure, his death, iv. 133
  Galleford or Camelford, ii. 402
  Gallia, i. 214――iv. 116
  ―――― Celtica, i. 107
  Galsworthy of Hartland, Mr. ii. 347
  Galton borough, ii. 162
  Games, John, iii. 83
  Gandi, Peter, iv. 28
  Gannell creek, i. 246. Account of 249
  Gardiner, Elizabeth, and Stephen Bishop of Winchester, ii. 194
  Garganus, mount, ii. 172
  Garlenick in Creed, iii. 454
  Garles, _see Grylls_
  Garnegan, i. 215
  Garrows, i. 415
  Garsike, by Leland, iv. 264
  Gascoign wine, iii. 182, 248
  Gascoigne, i. 338――iv. 145
  Gauerygan, account of, i. 224
  ―――― of Gauerygan, i. 224. Arms 225
  Gaul, i. 107 _bis_, 294――ii. 131
  Gaulis, Marianne, iii. 231
  Gaulish forests, i. 333, 336
  Gaunt, John of, iii. 65
  Gaurigan, ancestor of Charles Bodville, Earl of Radnor, iv. 73
  Gaveston, Piers, i. 338
  Gayer of Araler-Grace, Samuel, i. 256
  Gazania rigens, iv. 182
  Geach, i. 10
  Geake, Mr. iii. 42
  Gear, account of, i. 364
  Gedy of Trebersey, Richard, iii. 337 _bis_. Family 337
  Gee, Rev. Walter, of Wick St. Mary, iv. 136
  Geenlow, i. 344
  Genefre, St. ii. 430
  Genesis, book of, iii. 69
  Genesius, St. ii. 86
  Geneva, iii. 188
  Genevour, wife of King Arthur, iii. 337
  Genis, John, ii. 423
  Genlyn, account of, i. 365
  Gennis, St. Manor, ii. 87
  Gennis, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 275, 352, 353.――or St. Gennys, ii.
    234, 273
  GENNYS ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, impropriator, ii. 86. By Editor, the
    Saint, Treveeg by Mr. Lysons ibid. Arms of the Yeo’s, manor of St.
    Gennis, Lord Rolle’s manor, Treworgy, Braddon family 87.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 88
  Genoese, Sir H. Killigrew, Ambassador to, ii. 372
  Gentleman’s Magazine, ii. 295――iv. 141. Communication to, respecting
    Tywardreth priory 104
  Geographers, ancient, vague and uncertain, ii. 19
  Geological society of Cornwall, ii. 100 _ter._――Instituted by Dr.
    Paris, Dr. Boase secretary to, iii. 95. Transactions of 11――iv. 166
  Geology, Dr. Boase on, iii. 95, 100.――Principles of, ii. 47――iii. 57
  George, William, iii. 387
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 75, 112, 304, 351, 431――iii. 62, 135, 201――iv.
    21, 157
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 303, 407――iii. 28, 62, 367――iv. 21, 107
  ―――― 3rd, i. 157――ii. 158――iii. 106, 219, 235, 249.――His accession,
    i. 321.――Bells rung by the same men at his coronation and jubilee,
    iv. 18
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― St. i. 157
  ―――― St. island, iv. 26
  George’s, St. channel, i. 234, 289, 407――ii. 48, 145, 182, 237, 273,
    282, 283, 340――iii. 253, 280, 430
  Geran, i. 413
  Gerance, parish, ii. 5, 275
  Gerandus, St. ii. 51
  Geranium, iv. 182
  Gerans, parish, ii. 275
  GERANS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ii. 50. Value
    of benefice, endowment, saint, patron, incumbent, land tax, seats,
    Tregeare 51. Dispute for its possession 52. Judge Dolben 53.
    Treligan, Rosteage, Trewince 54. By Tonkin, tenure, Nosworthy
    family, Trewithian, Trelegar 55. The Beacon, Tregaliavean, Rosteage
    56. By Editor, Rosteague ibid. Trewince, prospect from church,
    Bowling Green, endowment of church, Polskatho, Pettigrew, Nanquitty,
    Tregeare 57. Trewithian, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 58
  Gerard, Fitton, Earl of Macclesfield, i. 67
  Gereon, St. ii. 51
  Gerint ab Erbyn, i. 338. Elegy upon, ib. King Arthur’s admiral 404
  German accession, iii. 216
  ―――― court, ii. 407
  ―――― custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  ―――― line of English Princes, ii. 244
  ―――― ocean, iii. 11
  ―――― Protestants are Lutherans, ii. 74
  ―――― sea, ii. 27
  ―――― soldiers driven from Charlestown to St. Ives by the wind, ii. 268
  ―――― St. ii. 59, 60. His history, bishop of Auxerre, heresies of the
    Arians and Pelagians 63. He came over to refute the Pelagians,
    succeeded, preached at St. Alban’s 64. Victory obtained by his
    prayers 65
  German’s, St. abbey, ii. 60; or monastery 61, 62. Abbot of 62
  ―――― bishoprick, ii. 60
  ―――― chapel at St. Alban’s, ii. 65, 75
  ―――― creek, i. 32――ii. 363――iii. 436
  ―――― Lord, iii. 39.――Earl of, ii. 234
  ―――― manor, iii. 2
  ―――― parish, i. 343――ii. 87, 118, 361, 362, 363, 364 _bis_――iii.
    118, 119, 124, 167, 245, 275, 371, 436 _bis_, 440
  GERMANS, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, rectory, chancel, ii.
    59. Abbey, once the cathedral see 60; afterwards collegiate
    church, derivation of the word abbat 61. Hircanus the Levite,
    value of the priory, borough 62. Election of members, writ, arms
    of the priory, market and fair, history of saint 63. Priory-house
    65. Eliots 66. Seats, Bake, Coltdrynike, Millinike 67. Hendre,
    Catchfrench 68. By Tonkin, town, first return to parliament 68.
    Elective franchise, sometimes called Cuddenbeck; the priory by
    Browne Willis 69. Eliot family 70. Priory-house 71. Seat of a
    suffragan bishop to Exeter, advowsons and impropriation 72. By
    Editor, saint’s celebrity, doctrines of Pelagius 72. Saint’s
    history 73. Various places in Britain dedicated to him,
    improvements at the priory 74. Statute for suffragan bishopricks,
    Bake, Mr. Moyle and his works 76. Aldwinick, Catchfrench, Sir John
    Eliot’s quarrel with Mr. Moyle 77. Statistics 78. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Clicker Tor, and Trerule foot 79
  German’s, St. priory, ii. 70, 75, 123, 361, 362――iii. 245, 253,
    336――iv. 69 _bis_.――Prior of, ii. 59, 118, 119 _bis_, 365――iii. 336
  ―――― town, iii. 268. The Cornish see removed to 415
  Germanes, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  Germanus, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 72. His victory
    explained, came a second time to Britain 74. Converted a pagan army,
    his death and burial, and places dedicated to him 75
  Germany, ii. 407 _bis_――iii. 285. Persecution of the Protestants in
    67.――St. Boniface undertook to convert, iv. 126 _bis_
  ―――― the apostle of, iv. 126
  Germayn’s, St. by Leland, iv. 291
  Germo, ii. 126
  Germocus, St. by Leland, iv. 264
  Germoe, King, his throne, i. 125
  ―――― parish, iv. 89
  ―――― people of, ii. 82
  Germow parish, i. 118 _bis_――ii. 169
  ―――― St. said to be an Irish king, his tomb and chair, ii. 81
  GERMOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, Godolphin Ball,
    ii. 80. By Tonkin, Godolphin Ball ibid. Name of parish, saint 81. By
    Editor, Hals’s history of St. Gordian, tradition of St. Germoe,
    village of Bojil, William Lemon 81. Process of mining 82. Mr.
    Lemon’s mine at Trowell 83. Gwennap mines, Cavnon adit, a present
    from Frederick Prince of Wales to Mr. Lemon 84. Lemon family 85.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 85
  Gernigan, Anne and Sir Henry, iii. 140
  Gernon, Geoffrey de, ii. 209
  Gernow, i. 300
  Geron’s, St. iv. 274. By Leland ibid.
  Gerrance, i. 26
  Gerrans parish, iv. 117 _ter._, 124
  Gerrard, Sir William, ii. 235
  Gerras mines, i. 20
  Gerry, Rev. Mr. ii. 319
  Gerson’s parish, ii. 281
  Geruncius, King of the Britons, ii. 50
  Gervasius, St. i. 99
  Gerveys, Elizabeth and John, ii. 396
  Getulius, a Roman citizen and martyr, iv. 117
  Ghent, ii. 127, 345
  Giant, story of a, ii. 113
  Giant’s hedge, description of, iv. 29
  Gibbon’s account of the Paleologi, ii. 368
  Gibbs, Dr. James, his Life, ii. 111
  ―――― of St. Colomb, i. 396
  Gibson, Captain Charles, R. N. ii. 375 _bis_
  Giddy, Rev. Edward, i. 362. Catherine ibid. Davies 363.――Edward,
    iii. 97. His character 93. Arranged the cabinet of the Cornish
    Geological Society 100. Rev. Edward, the Editor’s father 159, 337.
    John, memoir of 273. Thomas, his character 96. Family 94
  ―――― of Trebersey family, iii. 39
  Gifford family, ii. 153 _bis_.――Mr. Bishop’s assumed name, iii. 143
  ―――― of Fewborough family, iii. 222
  Giggy, St. ii. 254. His well ibid.
  Gilbart, John, iv. 55
  Gilbert, Davies (the Editor), i. 363――iv. 148.――Catherine, his
    daughter, ii. 100. Wife of Grenville 341. Family 189.――C. S. iii.
    151.――His History of Cornwall, i. 234――iii. 151.――Rev. R. P. of St.
    Wenn, iv. 151. W. R. 97
  ―――― of Crompton castle, i. 134
  ―――― of Tacabre, i. 134. Samuel 133, 134.――Of Tachbear, in
    Bridgerule, Samuel, iii. 235. Family 23――iv. 45, 62
  Gilpin, Mr. iii. 166
  Giraldus Cambrensis, i. 305, 337
  Githa, i. 168.――Wife of Earl Godwin, ii. 415.――Of Godwin, Earl of
    Kent, iv. 155
  Glamorganshire, ii. 216――iii. 281.――Mr. Daniel’s smelting-house in,
    ii. 33.――Supplied Cornwall with steam-engines, iii. 305
  Glant parish, ii. 36――iii. 425――iv. 99
  GLANT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ii. 88. Ancient name,
    value of benefice, endowment, patron, vicar, impropriation,
    land-tax, Penevit 89. By Tonkin, name, etymology 90. By Editor,
    Hals’s History of St. Sampson, ib. Penquite, Lentyon, a castle,
    name, first boarding-school for young ladies, peculiarities of the
    church, statistics 91. Incumbent, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 92
  Glanvill, Judge, i. 206. Miss 43, 245.――Mr. ii. 59
  ―――― of Catchfrench, Francis, i. 244
  ―――― of Killyvor, John and Mary, i. 221.――Family, iv. 160
  Glanville, Francis, ii. 77 _bis_. Rev. John 234. Family vault in
    Kilkhampton church 352. Family 231, 339.――Frances and William E.
    iii. 219
  Glaseney college, iii. 224. At Penryn 194.――Glasney, ii. 341, 96
    _bis_. Of canons regular 136. Provost of 113――iv. 1, 2. Its founder
    2.――Glassney, Robert Lyddra, provost of, iii. 257
  ―――― monastery near Penryn, iii. 446.――Glasseney, ii. 286
  Glasgow, i. 247
  Glasney, John de, i. 246
  Glasnith i. 209
  Glastonbury, i. 306, 337 _bis_――ii. 305――iv. 36
  ―――― abbey, iii. 262――iv. 25. Its dissolution 37. Michael, abbat of 26
  ―――― church of, iv. 26
  ―――― monks of, iv. 26, 27
  ―――― John of, i. 307
  Glebridge manor, account of, ii. 375
  Glenning, Nicholas, i. 113
  Glesnith, by Leland, iv. 271
  Glin, i. 168 _bis_. Account of 171 _bis_
  Globularia longifolia, iv. 182
  Gloucester, i. 113――ii. 76 _bis_
  ―――― Bishop of, William Warburton, ii. 265
  ―――― cathedral, cenotaph to the Rev. J. Smyth in, ii. 278
  ―――― Duke of, Richard, afterwards King, made sheriff of Cornwall,
    ii. 185
  ―――― earls of, ii. 148.――William, i. 266, 288.――William,
    illegitimate son of King Henry 1st, and Robert, his son, ii. 148
  ―――― hall, Oxford, now Worcester college, ii. 233. Its Fasti ibid.
  ―――― honour of, ii. 147, 341
  Glover, Rev. William, ii. 147 _bis_――Rev. William of Phillack, iii.
    344 _bis_
  Glover’s Somersetshire, iii. 186
  Gluvias parish, i. 135 _bis_――ii. 2, 129, 337――iii. 59, 224,
    231――iv. 1. Rev. G. Allanson, vicar of 95
  GLUVIAS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, church before the
    Conquest, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, ii.
    92. Land-tax, seats, Roscrow, Innis, Gosose river and house, Penryn
    borough, the Ocrinum of Ptolemy, antiquity of manor 94. Charters,
    elective franchise, markets, fairs, arms, form of writ,
    insignificance in Carew’s time, subsequent improvement 95. College
    of Black Canons at Glasnewith 96. Inhabitants of Penryn, Lady
    Killigrew’s cup 97. By Tonkin, Enis, ib. Roscrow 98. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Gluvias, borough of Penryn, Enis, Cosawis, Bohelland
    farm, story of “Fatal Curiosity”, 100. Parish fortunate in clergy,
    beauty of situation, dangerous road remedied 104. Statistics, vicar,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 105
  Gluvias, St. ii. 99
  Glyn, John, i. 215. Family 261
  Glynford, i. 172
  Glynn barton, i. 172, 173, 298
  ―――― Dr. Robert, his learning, ii. 153. Held in high respect at
    college, entertained Mr. Pitt 154. Thomas 142. Family 153. Arms
    142.――Jane, iii. 247 _bis_. John murdered 246. John 247, 248 _bis_.
    Thomasine 248. Miss 279. Family 23, 246. Arms 249
  ―――― of Glynn, Denny, i. 172. Edmund and John 173. Nicholas 171.
    Serjeant 173 _bis_. William 172. Family 173, 305. Arms 172.――Thomas,
    ii. 397 _bis_. Family 142, 339, 383, 397 _bis_. Property 397
  ―――― of Glynford, Nicholas, i. 172
  ―――― of Heliton, i. 173
  ―――― of Helston, ii. 339
  Glynne of Polkinhorne, Thomas and William, ii. 137
  Gnaphalium ericoides, iv. 182
  ―――― fetidum, iv. 182
  ―――― stœchas, iv. 182
  Godalgar, etymology, i. 119
  Godfrey, Charles and Charlotte, iii. 217
  Godollon castle, iv. 228
  Godolphin administration, ii. 217
  ―――― Ball, account of by Hals and Tonkin, ii. 80
  ―――― barony, i. 127
  ―――― blowing-house, i. 394
  ―――― earldom, i. 127
  ―――― Sir Francis, i. 123 _ter._, 232, 394 _bis_, 395 _ter._ Francis,
    Earl of 126, 127. Francis, Lord, and Henry 127. John 122 _bis_. Mary
    127. Sidney 59. Sidney, Earl of 123 _bis_, 126 _quat._, 232, 234.
    William 123 _quat._ Sir William 123, 232. Pedigree to the Earl 123.
    From the Earl 126. Family 74, 125, 160, 224, 225, 262 _bis_. Arms
    124. Property 127.――Catherine, ii. 217. Francis 217, 269. Sir
    Francis 9. Sir William 170. Miss 236. Duke of Leeds, heir of 218.
    Family 80 _bis_, 160, 170, 217 _bis_. Patrons of Helston 160. Arms
    335. Monuments and curious inscription on one 219.――Family, iii. 8,
    47 _bis_, 286――iv. 54, 173.――Saying of, iii. 295. A branch of
    57.――Lord, ii. 83, 139, 162, 219
  ―――― of Godolphin, Thomas, recorder of Helston, ii. 160.――John, iii. 211
  ―――― of Treveneage, iii. 81
  ―――― of Treworveneth, family extinct, Colonel William, iii. 288
  ―――― hill, i. 128 _bis_.――Hills, ii. 85
  ―――― house, i. 395
  ―――― lands, i. 119, 121. Etymology 119, 120
  Godrevy, account of, ii. 150
  ―――― point, i. 166――ii. 151
  Godwin, Bishop, i. 130. His catalogue of English Bishops, iii. 415
  ―――― Earl, i. 168――ii. 415.――Of Kent, iv. 155 _bis_, 156
  Godwyn sands, iii. 310
  Golant parish, ii. 390
  Gold, the largest pieces in Cornwall found in Ladock parish, ii. 355
  Golden, Goulden, Gowlden, or Gulden manor, iii. 355, 356, 360, 361,
    365, 464
  ―――― parish, iii. 383
  Goldingham, i. 247 _bis_
  Goldney family, ii. 341
  Goldsithney village, iii. 308. Tale of a fair removed to 309
  Goldsmith, Lieut. R.N. removed the rock at Castle Treryn, iii. 31
  Goldsmith’s rents, London, iv. 86
  Goliah’s sword, i. 334
  Gomronson, account of, i. 392
  Gonnet’s, St. park, iii. 397
  Gonrounson, i. 387
  Gonwallo parish, iii. 127, 128; or Gonwallow, ii. 80, 237
  Gooch of Orford, Suffolk, G. W. iv. 130
  Good Hope, Cape of, iii. 187
  Goodall, Mr. ii. 43
  ―――― of Fowey, John, ii. 98.――Family, iii. 162
  Goodere, Captain, Dineley, Sir Edward, Sir John, i. 204.――Sir J. D.
    Captain Samuel, whose history is tragical, and was published by
    Foote, his nephew, and Miss, iv. 90
  Goodwood, i. 372
  Goodyere, Anne, iii. 159
  Goonhilly downs, i. 304――ii. 331 _bis_――iii. 127, 128, 138
  Goonwyn, ii. 254
  Gooseham village, iii. 255
  Goran manor, iii. 90
  ―――― or Gorran parish, ii. 330――iii. 195, 198, 202, 207
  GORAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, land-tax, church, prior
    to the Conquest, remarkable places, Goranhoane, Bodrigham, ii.
    106. Family of that name 107. Escape from Bosworth, Bodrigan’s
    leap 108. Discord with the Haleps of Lammoran, Tregarden,
    Tregarthyn family 109. Arms, Trewoolla 110. Family 111. Dr. James
    Gibbs 111. Anthony Wills 112. By Tonkin, etymology, saint 112.
    Trevennen, Trevasens, Polgorror, Treveor, Pennore, Thicavosa,
    story of a giant 113. Situation and description of church, Lady
    Brannell’s tomb, Richard Edgecombe’s monument 114. By Editor,
    Trevascus, Treveor, Bodrigan ibid. Statistics, vicar, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Deadman point 115
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 414
  Goran-carhayes, i. 413
  Goranhoane, account of, ii. 106
  Gordian, St. account of, ii. 81
  Gordon, Lady Catharine, ii. 186, 191. Perkin Warbeck’s wife,
    pensioned by Henry 7th 191.――Sir A. C. iii. 9
  ―――― St. church, ii. 80
  Gorges, Sir William, i. 348 _bis_
  Gorian, St. a persecutor converted, ii. 112
  Gorien, or Coren, St. a missionary from Ireland, ii. 113
  Goring, general, i. 113. Lord, the royalist general, iii. 81――iv.
    115, 187
  Gorseddan, i. 192
  Gosmoor, i. 220 _bis_
  Gosose, account of, ii. 94, 100
  ―――― creek, ii. 94
  ―――― river, ii. 94
  Gospels, ancient copy of, iii. 408
  Gotherington manor, i. 64――iii. 436
  Gothian, St. ii. 147
  Gothic architecture of Henry 7th’s reign, iv. 81
  Gothland, i. 336
  Gothlois, Earl of Cornwall, etymology of name, iv. 94
  Gothlouis, Duke of Cornwall, i. 324, 327 _quat._, 328 _quat._, 329
    _bis_, 331 _quint._, 332 _bis_, 342. His death 331, and funeral 332
  Gould, John, iii. 42
  ―――― of Downs, William, iii. 249
  Gove of Devon, Elizabeth, iii. 176 _bis_
  Goverigon, ii. 217
  Govill, iii. 402――iv. 117
  Gower, Rev. G. L. of St. Maben, iii. 74. Of St. Michael Penkivell 221
  Goynlase in St. Agnes, iii. 319
  Graas, ii. 292
  Grace, St. iii. 364. Her skeleton ibid.
  Grade parish, ii. 358 _bis_――iii. 128, 257, 421, 423
  GRADE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 116. By Tonkin, etymology
    and value of benefice ibid. By Editor, etymology, Erisey ibid.
    Advowson of living, feast, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Cadgwith, quarry at Cogar, Kennick cove 117
  ―――― St. ii. 116 _bis_
  Graffo hundred, Leicestershire, ii. 363
  Graham, Thomas, and Mr. ii. 47.――Rev. H. E. of Ludgian, iii. 54
  Grammar, Farnaby’s system of, iv. 87
  Grampont, iv. 30
  Grampound borough, account of, i. 253, 256, 258, 259――iii.
    395.――Arms, i. 254.――Philip Hawkins, M.P. for, iii. 356, 367. Thomas
    Hawkins 362
  Grampound, town, iii. 360, 371
  Grand Junction canal, iii. 10 _bis_
  ―――― jury, charge to, ii. 76
  Grandison, John de, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 1, 372 _bis_,
    373.――Demanded legacies for endowing churches, ii. 96. Used his
    influence in aid of Bideford bridge 341.――His register, iii. 1
  ―――― John Villiers, Earl of, i. 69
  ―――― Viscount, father of the Duchess of Cleveland, ii. 11
  Granite sent from Penryn to London, i. 242
  Grant, Rev. John of Lezant, iii. 40. Mr. Canon, rector of Ruan
    Lanyhorne 405. Mr. 404
  Grantham, ii. 76.――St. Symphorian and St. Wolfran buried at, iv. 117
  Granville, Sir Bevill, i. 113.――Colonel, ii. 93.――Sir Bevill, iii.
    40. His great victory 351. His death 40. Grace, and John Earl of
    Bath 255. Family 353. Saying of 295
  ―――― of Penheale, Degory, i. 419
  ―――― of Stow, Margaret and Roger _bis_, i. 419
  ―――― Grace, Countess of, and Robert Carteret Earl of, ii. 346
  Graunpond, by Leland, iv. 272
  Graves, Thomas, i. 37.――J. iv. 38
  ―――― Lord, i. 37――ii. 252
  Gray, the poet, i. 71. Mr. 384
  Gray’s Inn, ii. 267
  Great Mystery of Godliness, iii. 79
  ―――― Work mine, ii. 83, 304 _bis_
  Grebble, Mr. iv. 74
  Greece, iii. 187.――Emperor of, ii. 365 _bis_――Artists of, iv. 169
  Greef islands, iv. 237
  Greek church, ii. 370, 371
  ―――― college, ii. 371
  ―――― empire, ii. 373
  ―――― language fashionable in England, ii. 373.――Tables of, iv. 87
  Greeks, i. 341――iii. 395.――Acquainted with Falmouth harbour, ii. 19.
    And fetched tin from it 3
  Green bank, Falmouth, i. 137
  Greenough, Mr. iv. 124
  Greenwich, ii. 223, 359, 399――iii. 281, 375, 376
  ―――― East, ii. 56
  Greenwich observatory, the first meridian, ii. 222
  Grees, Germaine, iv. 77
  Grefe by Leland, iv. 289. Islet by Leland and trajectus 274
  Grege, William, iii. 16
  Gregor, Francis, ii. 393.――Rev. William, iii. 113. Mrs.
    406.――Francis, iv. 77, 89, 121, 129. William 123. His analysis of
    Veryan limestone 123, 124. Family 74, 89, 128, 130
  ―――― of Cornelly, i. 204
  ―――― of Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  ―――― of Tredinike, Francis, i. 243, 244 _sex._ John 243, 244. Miss
    244 _bis_. Rev. William ibid.――Family, iii. 112
  ―――― of Trewarthenick, Mr. ii. 407.――Francis, iii. 315 _bis_, 318
    _ter._ His ancestors 318. Mr. 54.――Family, ii. 407
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93――iii. 327
  Gregory, Mr. ii. 146
  ―――― Pope, ii. 203, 212
  ―――― St. Pope, ii. 288
  ―――― 1st, or the Great Pope, iii. 284, 285――ii. 287. His letter
    preserved 288
  ―――― 9th, Pope, i. 312
  ―――― 13th, Pope, founded a college for Greek children at Rome,
    opposed the Greek errors, his calendar, ii. 370
  Gregov, M^c, i. 365
  Grenfell, Pascoe, ii. 216. Pascoe, jun. notice of ibid.
  ―――― of Marazion, Emma, ii. 224
  Grenville, Anne, and Rt. Hon. Bernard, ii. 98. Bernard, sheriff of
    Devon 341. Bernard, father of Sir Beville and Sir Richard 348 _bis_.
    Sir Bevill 31. Sheriff of Cornwall 186. Sir Beville 333 _ter._, 334.
    Registry of his baptism 348. Sold Lanew and Bryn 332. His letter to
    Sir John Trelawny 349. His character 343. By Editor 348. His death
    in the battle of Lansdowne 343. Epitaph to 347. Poetical 348.
    Charles 351. George, sheriff of Devon 341. George, M.P. for
    Cornwall, rhyme on his election, created Lord Lansdowne, a poet, his
    imprisonment and death 351. Grace, Countess Granville 346. John 342.
    Sir John, afterwards Earl of Bath 333, 345, 350. Dispossessed Noye
    by unjust litigation of an estate sold to him by Sir Bevill 333.
    Instrumental to the restoration, created Earl of Bath, &c. 345.
    Built the mansion at Stowe 346, 351. Earls of Bath 340. Richard,
    sheriff of Cornwall, and Richard, sheriff of Devon 341. Richard,
    descended from Rollo, Duke of Normandy, came over with William the
    Conqueror 344. Sir Richard, vice-admiral 342. His battle with the
    Spaniards, and death 344. Sir Richard 342. Registry of his baptism
    348. Called by the rebels Skellum Grenville, imprisoned, Clarendon’s
    unamiable character of him, his death 345. Robert, sheriff of
    Cornwall 341. Roger, Capt. R.N. 341, 344. Lost in the Mary Rose
    frigate 342. Sir Theobald promoted the building of Bideford bridge
    341. William, Archbishop of York, son of Sir Theobald 344. Family,
    by Lysons, settled at Bideford 341. Possessed the manor of
    Kilkhampton nearly from the conquest 343. Under a temporary eclipse
    350. Monuments 347.――Sir Richard, trait of, iii. 184 _bis_. Miss 60
    _bis_.――Sir Richard, his siege of Plymouth, raised by Essex, he
    retreated, was followed, re-inforced by the King, iv. 185. Quartered
    with the King at Lord Mohun’s house 186. With other generals hemmed
    in Essex, and obliged him to retire 187. Family 16, 136――i. 262
  Grenville of Bideford, John, sheriff of Devon, ii. 341. Richard 344
  ―――― of Ilcombe, ii. 346
  ―――― of Penheale, George, i. 378.――Degory, ii. 110
  ―――― of Stow, Roger, i. 313. Family 17, 19.――Thomas, sheriff of
    Cornwall, probably the first of Stowe, ii. 341. Family 109, 332
    _bis_. Sir Bernard 22, 162. Sir Bevill 22. His birth and death 162.
    Unhorsed in the battle near Stratton 13. Sir John 172. Family 162
    _bis_
  ―――― of Stowe, Bucks, family, iii. 192, 194
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ―――― Lady, present possessor of Boconock, i. 69. Lord 69, 112
  ―――― Duke of Buckingham, iii. 192
  Greston-moor, iii. 41
  Grey, Thomas, Duke of Dorset, iii. 294. Thomas, Marquis of Dorset
    350. Henry, Duke of Suffolk 294 _bis_. Heir of the family
    140.――Family, i. 383
  ―――― Lord, ii. 197
  Greynville, Rev. Mr. ii. 414
  Gridiron, explanation of St. Lawrence’s, i. 89
  Griffin, Colonel, i. 68
  Griffith, William, ii. 426
  Grills, Charles and Rev. Richard, ii. 394
  Grogith, i. 243, 244
  Grose, Mr. ii. 387
  Gross, Mr. iii. 82
  Grosse, Ezekiel, i. 162. William 136. Family 145, 162――ii.
    217.――Miss, iii. 248. Mr. 383. Family 390. Arms 249
  ―――― of Comborne and Golden, Ezekiel, iii. 212, 215, 243, 361, 406,
    427, 463. His daughter 215, 361, 406, 427, 463 _bis_
  Growden, Lawrence, iii. 175
  Groyne, packet boats from receive their despatches at Falmouth, ii. 11
  Gryllo, Rev. William, i. 288
  Grylls or Garles, rocks at, iii. 23
  ―――― Rev. R. G. i. 128. Matthew and Robert 8.――Alice, ii. 396.
    Charles 227, 396 _ter._ John 396 _bis_. Richard and Rev. Richard
    396. Rev. R. G. 395, 396. Thomas 218. Mrs. 228. Family
    395.――Christopher, iii. 260. Rev. R. G. of St. Neot’s 262, 266.
    Restored the church 262, 264. Rev. Mr. of Luxilian 57. Family
    113――iv. 54
  ―――― of Court, Charles, ii. 395
  ―――― of Helston, Rev. R. G. ii. 124. Thomas 218
  ―――― of Tavistock, William, ii. 395
  ―――― manor, iii. 23
  Guary Mir, or Miracle Plays, iii. 329
  Guavis, William, iii. 284
  Gubbin’s cave, iii. 185
  Guddern, ii. 305. Account of by Hals 300. By Tonkin 303
  ―――― barrow, ii. 305
  Guerir, or Guevor, St. history of, iii. 362
  Guernsey, i. 115, 169.――Lighthouses, ii. 358
  Guilford, ii. 76
  Guillemard, Mary, Philippa Davies, i. 363
  Guinear, i. 355
  Guisors in Normandy, ii. 177
  Gulby, Slade, ii. 114
  Guldeford, Henry, iii. 206
  Gullant, by Leland, iv. 277, 290
  Gully, i. 408
  ―――― of Tresilian, Samuel and Mr. iii. 269
  Gulval parish, ii. 169, 174――iii. 46, 54, 78
  GULVAL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Laneseley, Als
    family, ii. 118. Gulval well 121. By Tonkin, Lanistley manor,
    Keneggy ibid. Etymology of parish 122. By Editor, St. Gunwall ibid.
    Ancient name, according to Whitaker, impropriation, vicarage,
    Kenegie 123. Trevailer, Rosemorron, fertility of part of the parish
    124. Chiandower, parish feast, history of St. Martin, statistics
    125. Geology by Dr. Boase 126
  ―――― register, ii. 83
  ―――― well, ii. 121
  Gumb, i. 185 _quat._ Daniel, his house cut in a rock 184
  Gundred, iii. 398. Her filial love 393
  ――――’s, St. well, iii. 393
  Gundrons, ii. 121
  Gunhilly, by Leland, iv. 288
  Gunpowder plot, iii. 361
  Gunwall, St. his history by the Editor, ii. 122
  Gunwallo, King, ii. 126
  ―――― parish, i. 118, 301 _bis_, 304――ii. 155――iii. 257
  GUNWALLO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, etymology, ii. 126. Patron, incumbent, land tax, manor
    of Gunwallowinton 127. By Tonkin, circle of stones at Earth ibid. By
    Editor, St. Winwallo ibid. Manor of Winnington (by Lysons),
    situation of church, buried treasure, Mr. Knill 128. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 129
  Gunwallowinton manor, ii. 127
  Gunwin, account of, iii. 8
  Guran, i. 415
  Gurlyn, account of, i. 349
  Gurnet’s head, iv. 165
  Gurney, Rev. Samuel, i. 354.――Sir Richard, parish priest of
    Bideford, admonished in his sleep to build Bideford bridge, ii.
    341.――Rev. Samuel of St. Earth and Redruth, iii. 386. Rev. Mr. of
    St. Mervyn 177. Three in succession held St. Mervyns for above a
    century 179.――Rev. Samuel of Tregony, iv. 129
  Gurran parish, iii. 190
  Guthrun the Dane, i. 290
  Guy, Rev. Charles of Padstow, iii. 278
  ―――― Earl of Warwick, iv. 111, 114. His life 113
  Guye, i. 8
  Guzman, Don Felix de, i. 311
  Gwairnick, i. 19
  Gwarnike, i. 16. Two chapels at 17
  Gwatkin, R. L. i. 2――ii. 306 _bis_. Mrs. 306.――Family, i. 2
  Gwavas, Mr. iii. 46. Family 286
  Gwavis, William, iii. 284
  Gweek, ii. 330
  Gwellimore, King of Ireland, i. 326
  Gwenap parish, ii. 123, 222, or Gwennap 144, 306――iii. 306, 380,
    390――iv. 1, 2, 5 _bis_. Mines of 89
  GWENAP parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value of
    benefice, ii. 129. Patron, incumbent, land tax, rectory,
    remarkable places, Trefyns 130. St. Dye chapel, Paldy’s mine 131.
    Memorable storm 132. By Tonkin, tumuli at Carne mark, name of
    parish. By Editor, Saints Wenap and Dye 132. St. Dye’s history,
    Cornmarth, excavation at 133. Scornier, its rich mine, Poldice
    mine, copper in tin mines, size of church 134. Alterations,
    Beauchamp monument, tradition of monks in church tower,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining
    district, beautiful porphyry near Burncoose 136
  Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Gwendron parish, i. 221, 236――ii. 93, 155, 157, 166 _bis_――iii. 127
    _bis_, 128, 441, 442――iv. 1, 2 _ter._, 137
  GWENDRON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, remarkable places,
    Trenethike, ii. 137. Nine maids 137. By Tonkin, endowment of
    church, patron, impropriator, Trenithike, name of parish, Bodilly
    Veor, and Vean 137. Treneare 138. By the Editor, former patron
    138. Trenethick, Nansloe, Trelil, parish very productive of tin
    139. Penhallynk monument, vicarage house, parish feast, Mr. Jago a
    magician, statistics 140. Geology by Dr. Boase 141
  Gwenwynwyn ab Nan, i. 338
  Gwernak, by Leland, iv. 262
  Gwiator, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwihter, Henry, iii. 387
  Gwillim’s Heraldry, i. 320
  Gwinear, or Gwyniar, or Guinier parish, i. 160, 344――ii. 145 _bis_,
    225――iii. 339, 344, 345
  GWINEAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, ii. 141. Impropriator, land tax,
    remarkable places, Lanyon, Polkinhorne, Coswin 142. By Tonkin, name
    142. Impropriation 143. By Editor, productive of copper, Herland
    mine, Whele Alfred, Whele Treliston, Lanyon family 143. Statistics,
    vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, Relistion mine 144
  Gwinnodock, St. iii. 240
  Gwinter, ii. 331 _bis_
  Gwithian bay, ii. 145
  ―――― parish, ii. 234
  GWITHIAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor of Connerton,
    exchanged by Henry 3rd for that of St. James, ii. 145. Form of
    writ, value of benefice, patron, land tax 146. By Tonkin, rectory,
    patron, incumbent, etymology 146. By Editor, advowson, charter of
    Henry 2nd, manor of Conorton 147. Leland’s tradition of a large
    town, exchange of manors contradicted, account of St. James’s
    hospital 148. Lysons’s account of the inundation of sand 149.
    Planting of rushes to arrest it, sand calcareous, difficulty of
    burning it into lime, Godrevy, large fig tree in church-yard,
    parish feast, statistics 150. Geology by Dr. Boase, Godrevy
    point 151
  Gwyn, Mr. ii. 11
  Gwynn, i. 8
  Gwythian parish, ii. 141――iii. 140, 339 _bis_, 344
  Gyges, King, i. 394

  Haccombe, iii. 372. Chantry in ibid.
  ―――― Sir Stephen de, iii. 372
  Hack, John, iii. 387
  Hack and Cast, ii. 113
  Hadham, Edmund of, Earl of Britain and Richmond, iii. 65
  Hadley, John, his sextant, ii. 222
  ―――― in Suffolk, ii. 372
  Hadrian’s mole, iv. 148
  Hagulstadiensis, iv. 42
  Haile’s abbey, Gloucestershire, iii. 284, 285 _bis_
  Hailestown, by Leland, iv. 268
  Hains or Hens Burrow, iii. 394
  Hakewell’s Catalogue of the Speakers, iv. 44
  Haleboate rock, iii. 361
  Halep family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Lammoran, ii. 109
  Haleps family, iii. 215
  Halewyn or Hallwyn, account of, ii. 254
  Half crowns, £10,000 in, i. 265
  Halghland, ii. 430
  Haligan or Helligon, account of, iii. 65
  ―――― Robert de, iii. 66
  Halisworthy hundred, i. 133
  Hall barton, iii. 293――iv. 29, 31
  ―――― Bishop of Exeter, iii. 79. Mr. 280
  ―――― manor, iii. 293.――Account of, ii. 409. Walk at 410
  Hallabeer village, iii. 255
  Hallamore, Mr. ii. 97
  Hallet, Mr. iv. 22
  Hailing, Kent, ii. 152
  Hallton, account of, i. 312, 315
  Hallworthy, iii. 136
  Hals, Dr. i. 298. Lieut.-colonel James 113. John, Bishop of Lincoln
    or Litchfield and Coventry 218. Family 224.――Jane, ii. 119. John
    119, 120 _ter._ Simon 118, 119 _ter._ William 118. Family 118.
    Pedigree 119.――Anne, iii. 188. Grenville 187. Henry, memoir of 187.
    James, governor of Montserrat, taken prisoner at Plymouth 183. His
    life spared, suffered a rigorous imprisonment, verses given to him
    184. His marriage 186, and issue 186, 187. James 186. Wasted his
    property 187. John, Bishop of Lincoln or Litchfield and Coventry
    141. Nicholas 187. Thomas 186. His death 187. Thomas, memoir of
    187――William, the writer of this book, i. 216――ii. 56, 57, 86, 90,
    97, 99 _ter._, 116, 153 _bis_, 143, 147, 148, 163, 199 _bis_, 201,
    238, 256, 269, 273, 274 _bis_, 279, 281, 284, 305, 363, 411――iii.
    187, 62, 66, 90, 106, 126 _quint._, 135, 137, 160, 165, 166 _ter._,
    172, 184, 196, 213, 214 _quat._, 216, 221, 238 _bis_, 398, 432, 433,
    434――iv. 143, 25, 96, 138 _bis_, 139, 165.――His MS. ii. 127. Of
    Ladock parish lost 352.――Upon creeds, iii. 426. His mistakes 352.
    His parochial history 96. The MS. lent to the Editor 407.――Does not
    notice the Scilly Islands, iv. 168. His Cornish vocabulary 37, 39.
    On the vocabulary system 72. Granvill hall 74. The missing portions
    of his MS. sent to the Editor 184.――Family, iii. 208
  Hals of Efford, Anne, i. 221. John 419. Matthew 221. Richard 419.
    Family 298.――John, ii. 130
  ―――― of Efford and Fentongollan, John, i. 125. Sir Nicholas 125 and
    136. Nicholas 39.――Family, ii. 109
  ―――― of Fentongollan, i. 65. John 346, 356. Sir Nicholas 356.――John,
    ii. 170. Sir Nicholas 119, 170. Governor of Pendennis castle,
    sanctioned the building of Falmouth 9. His letters and reasons
    copied 10. Son of John of Efford, and his death 13. Family
    170.――John, iii. 209 _bis_, 212, 215, 464. Sir Nicholas 183, 212,
    215. Captain William, memoir of 183.――John and Sir Nicholas, iv. 2
  ―――― of Hals’s Savannah, Jamaica, Thomas and Major Thomas, ii. 120
  ―――― of Hungerford park, Berks, James, iii. 186
  ―――― of Kenedon, Richard, i. 313, 419――ii. 189――iii. 116
  ―――― of Lelant, i. 144 _ter._
  ―――― of Merthyr, James, i. 205; or Merther, James, ii. 30, 32, 111.
    Martha his wife 111. His eldest son, ii. 32.――Lieut.-col. James,
    iv. 188
  ―――― of Pengersick, Sir Nicholas, obtained a pardon for Lady
    Killigrew, ii. 6
  ―――― of Trembetha, John, iii. 7
  ―――― of Tresawsen, memoir of James, iii. 182
  ―――― of Truro, Grenville, i. 205
  Halse, James, M. P. ii. 271.――James, iii. 91
  Halsey, Rev. Joseph, i. 205.――Family 417. Edward, Joseph, M.D. and
    Nathaniel, iii. 188
  ―――― of Huntingdonshire family, iii. 188. Arms ibid.
  ―――― Rev. Joseph, of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 188 _bis_
  Halsham, Yorkshire, ii. 118
  Halton, i. 311. John de, Bishop of Carlisle 313
  ―――― of Hallton, Joan, i. 313 _bis_. Richard 313
  Halvose, iii. 113
  ―――― John, iii. 181
  Halwell, Sir John, ii. 189.――Family, i. 348
  Halwyn manor, iii. 313
  Ham, John, iv. 18
  Hambley of St. Columb, i. 259
  Hambly, Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii. 196
  Hamelin, presbyter of Launceston castle chapel, ii. 427
  Hamilton, Duke, i. 66, 67, 68.――Mr. iii. 62
  Hamley, Sir John, ii. 250.――Mr. iii. 65. Family 195. Arms 65
  ―――― of St. Neots, ii. 320
  ―――― of Trebithike, Mr. iv. 95
  Hamly of Trefreke, John, i. 383
  Hamlyn family, ii. 316
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  Hammett of Carmarthenshire family, iii. 256
  Hammond, Anthony, ii. 76
  Hamm’s castle, Normandy, the Earl of Oxford confined there, ii. 185
  Hamoaze, i. 266――ii. 362――iii. 45, 105, 108 _bis_
  Hampden, John, memorials of, ii. 349. Lord Nugent’s life of 77.――The
    rebel, iii. 144
  Hampshire, ii. 282――iii. 10, 145
  Hamson, Sir Thomas, i. 171
  Hancanon, Richard, i. 215
  Hancock, Rev. Mr. of St. Martin’s, near Looe, iii. 119
  Hancock of Hendreth, William, ii. 68
  ―――― of Pengelly, in Creed, Thomas, iii. 202
  Hankey, Warwick, iv. 157
  ―――― of Trekininge Vean, Joseph, i. 225
  Hans towns, ii. 6
  Hantertavas, account of, iii. 62
  Hardenfast manor, iii. 346
  Hardfast, i. 313
  Hardwicke, Earl of, Chief Justice, i. 269, 282, 283. His charge on
    the western circuit 278
  Hardy, John, ii. 209
  Hare of Trenowith, i. 406. Arms ibid.
  Harewood, i. 158. Sir W. Trelawney lives at, iii. 301
  Harleian MSS. iii. 154 _sex._
  Harlyn, John de, i. 373
  Hamington, Gervase de, iv. 41
  Harold, Edmund, Geoffrey and Thomas, iv. 146
  ―――― King, iii. 130, 142
  Harpsfield, i. 382――iii. 277
  Harrington, a notorious pirate, ii. 41
  ―――― Gervase de, ii. 128
  ―――― of Somersetshire, Miss, ii. 278
  ―――― William Bonville, Lord, iii. 294. Elizabeth, Lady; Lord, of
    Harrington, and his daughter ibid.
  Harris, William, i. 164. Family 197, 365.――Edward and Jane, ii. 304.
    John 58. Mary 416. Richard 255. Susanna 304. William sheriff of
    Cornwall 56. Mr. 416. The celebrated Mr. of Salisbury 103. Rev. Mr.
    253. Arms 122.――W. S. of Plymouth, his writings on lightning, iv.
    130.――Edward, iii. 103. John 82. William 103. Mr. 20. Family 83, 90
  ―――― of Curtutholl, iii. 170 _bis_
  ―――― of Hayne, Sir Arthur, ii. 122. William 121, 123.――Sir Thomas,
    iii. 103
  ―――― of Kenegie, William, iii. 85.――In Gulval, ii. 212. Christopher
    121, 123. Lydia 282
  ―――― of Park family, i. 205.――In St. Clement’s, Samuel and Mr. iii. 382
  ―――― of Pickwell, William, i. 244
  ―――― of Roseteague, Richard, ii. 56
  ―――― of Rosewarne in Camburne, ii. 39. Mr. 56
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, iv. 161
  Harrison, Rev. T. H. ii. 347
  ―――― the historian, ii. 403
  ―――― of Mount Radford, Devon, family, ii. 294
  Harrow school, ii. 243
  Hart, Dr. i. 370.――Family, ii. 255
  Hartland abbey, i. 168.――Devon, ii. 413, 414 _bis_, 415 _bis_――iv.
    155, 156.――Account of, ii. 415. Abbats of 414. Prior of 49 _bis_
  ―――― Galfrid de Dynham, Lord of, iv. 156
  Hartley Winchcombe, i. 164. Henry Winchmore, ii. 56. Winchmore 139
  Harvey, Mr. i. 254.――John, iii. 341 _bis_, and his son 341
  Harwich, ii. 28
  Harwood in Calstock, ii. 230
  Hastings, a cinque port, ii. 38. Enlarged 45.――Sands, iii. 10
  ―――― family, iii. 234, 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― Earl of Huntingdon, i. 378 _bis_
  Hatch, Samuel, i. 275. Family 270, 271, 274
  Hatsell’s Parliamentary Precedents, i. 356
  Hatt, i. 105
  Haulsey, Elizabeth, i. 399. John 400
  Haweis, David and Edward, ii. 307. Reginald 307 _bis_.――David, iii.
    382. Reginald 327 _bis_. Family 382, 383
  ―――― of Kelliow, Reginald, iii. 381. Mr. 382
  Hawes, John, iii. 387.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 4
  ―――― of Carlyan, ii. 302
  ―――― of Chincoos, Thomas, ii. 316. Arms 316
  ―――― of Kea, ii. 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Killiow, John, his arms, ii. 300
  Hawke, Mr. iv. 111
  Hawker, Rev. Jacob, iv. 19
  Hawkey, Joseph, ii. 415. Family 152.――Miss, iii. 116.――Joseph, iv. 139
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Joseph, ii. 253, 254
  ―――― of Trevego, Martha and Reginald, iii. 187
  ―――― of St. Wenowe, ii. 90
  Hawkins, i. 54, 243, 391, 407. Christopher 357 _bis_, 358, 364. Sir
    Christopher 8, 46, 258, 358, 392, 403. Henry 45, 259 _ter._ Jane
    357. John 274, 275, 357 _quat._ John and John Heywood 358. Dr. John
    417. Rev. John and Joseph 259. Mary 357, 364. Philip 357 _ter._
    Thomas 356, 357 _quat._, 358. Rev. Mr. of Blissland 259. Family 54,
    243, 391, 407. Arms 45.――Sir Christopher, ii. 148, 354, 358. His
    opinion of Ictis 20, 206. Rev. Mr. 258, 260. Family 281.――Sir
    Christopher, iii. 271 _bis_, 423. His discovery and working of a
    lead and silver mine 272. John 270. Rev. John, D.D. 268, 381. Of
    Pennance 356, 362. Rev. Dr. 196. Mary 367. Philip 268, 271, 354,
    356, 367. Rev. Mr. of Sithney 441. Mr. a pupil of Dr. Borlase 53.
    Mr. his paper on Geology 100. Family 197, 363.――Rev. Mr. Towednack,
    iv. 53. Family 161
  Hawkins of St. Austell, Barbara and Henry, i. 376. Grace 419, 422.
    Henry 419, 423
  ―――― of Creed, i. 45, 346, 387
  ―――― of Gonrounson, i. 392. Philip 387
  ―――― of Helston, i. 45. John 260 _bis_.――Thomas, iii. 113
  ―――― of Pennance, Ann and Barbara, i. 259, 260. Elizabeth 55, 259,
    260. George 259. Gertrude and Grace 260. Henry 259 _ter._ Jane 259.
    John 255, 260. John, D.D. 257, 259 _bis_. Mary 259 _bis_. Philip 55,
    255 _bis_, 257, 259 _bis_, 350. Arms 255.――Ann and Philip, ii. 242.
    Family 217
  ―――― of Pennemer, John, D.D. i. 418
  ―――― of Penzance, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356, 364, 366 _bis_. Christopher 259, 350.
    Thomas 346 _bis_, 349, 356, 357. Arms 349.――Christopher, iii. 136,
    196. Christopher of Helston and 367. Jane 136.――In St. Earth, and
    Trewithan in Probus, Sir Christopher, ii. 217
  ―――― of Trewithan, Christopher, iii. 368 _bis_. Henry and John 368.
    Philip 368 _bis_. Thomas 362, 368 _ter._ Miss 368
  Hawksley, Rev. J. W. of Redruth, iii. 390
  Hawkyns, Sir John, iv. 86
  Hawley, ii. 292. Dr. 233
  ―――― of Dartmouth, John, ii. 294
  Hawtys Brygge, iv. 255
  Hay, i. 187. Account of 411――ii. 353, 354
  Haydon, Mr. schoolmaster at Leskeard, iii. 18. Determined the
    longitude of Leskeard 19
  Hayford haven, iii. 74, 110
  Hayle, i. 359, 364 _bis_――ii. 83, 214
  ―――― causeway, iii. 386
  ―――― harbour, improved, iii. 341
  ―――― parish, iii. 339, 342, 343
  ―――― port of, ii. 261, 264
  ―――― river, i. 344, 350, 359, 377――iii. 5, 6, 125, 128, 339, 426.
    Estuary of 5, 11
  Hayleford channel, i. 236
  Hayman, Richard, iv. 18
  Hayme, Isabel, iii. 324. John 315, 324
  Hayne, in Devon, ii. 122 bis
  ―――― of Treland, John, ii. 320
  Haynes burrow, ii. 1
  Headon village, iv. 41
  Heale, Mr. ii. 151, 228, 319.――Miss, iv. 129――Family, i. 28, 107,
    177. Arms 107
  ―――― of Battlesford, ii. 137
  ―――― or Hele of Benetts, Edmund, iv. 152. George and Lucy 152, 154.
    Warwick 154. Name and arms 152
  ―――― of Brading, Lucy, ii. 235
  ―――― of Devon, Ellis, iii. 234
  ―――― of Fleet, Honor, and Sir Thomas, iii. 225. Family 211
  ―――― of Wembury, i. 65
  Hearle, Dr. James, and Rev. Mr. i. 298. Family, ib.――ii. 99, 270
  ―――― of Buryan, i. 359, 360
  ―――― of Penryn, John, i. 423.――Mr. ii. 97. Mr. worked Poldice mine,
    and possessed one third of the lands 134. Mr. the last of Penryn 99.
    Family 354.――Betty, iii. 440. Thomas 303. Family 8
  Hearn, ii. 186
  Hearne, i. 307――iii. 332
  ――――’s Appendix to Adam de Domerham, iv. 26
  Heart, Dr. Robert, ii. 151. His arms 152.――Family, iii. 391
  ―――― of St. Germans, ii. 152
  ―――― of Manhyniet, ii. 152
  ―――― of Tencreek family, ii. 152
  Heckens family, iii. 83. Richard, of St. Ives 88
  Hector, iii. 417, 418 _bis_, 420
  Hedgeland, J. P. iii. 264 _bis_
  Hedgeland’s prints of St. Neot’s windows, ii. 396
  Hedingham castle, Essex, iii. 424
  Hedui, i. 107
  Hele family, iii. 250, and heiress, iv. 136
  ―――― of Boscome, Devon, Rebecca and Thomas, iii. 297
  Helen, Empress of Rome, i. 237
  Helena, St. iii. 187.――Mother of Constantine, ii. 153. A monastery
    built by 37
  ―――― St. island, Dr. Maskelyne’s voyage to, ii. 222
  Helfon harbour, i. 38
  Helford channel, iii. 124
  ―――― river, i. 242――iii. 63, 126 _bis_, 127, 138
  ―――― village, iii. 113
  Helie, i. 2
  Heligan, ii. 126
  Heligon, i. 424. Account of 419
  Heliotropium corymbosum, iv. 182
  Hella in Camburne, ii. 141
  Hellanclose, account of, i. 293
  Helland parish, i. 60――ii. 340――iii. 64, 74
  HELLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquities,
    value, patron, land-tax, incumbent, Bocunyan, ii. 151. Barton of
    Helland, etymology of the word barton 152. By Tonkin, etymology 152.
    Saint, Gifford family 153. By Editor, etymology of barton,
    Penhargard manor, Broads barton, Glynn family 153. Statistics,
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Hellas river, ii. 330
  Helldon rectory, Norfolk, ii. 152
  Hellegar manor, account of, i. 264
  ―――― of Hellegar, Sibill, and arms, i. 265
  Hellesbury park, ii. 402.――Helsbury, iii. 223
  Helleston lake, iii. 442
  ―――― manor, iii. 442 _bis_
  Hellman, Miss, iii. 191
  Hellnoweth, nunnery at, iii. 126
  Helston borough, account of, ii. 156. First charter 158. Payment of
    rates 159. Patron, former representatives, letter on the reform as
    affecting it 160. Hospital of St. John 136, 137, 163. A coinage
    town 301. Coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, market house 164.
    Foray, and practice of bowling 165. Road to 215. Alexander
    Pendarves, burgess for 98. Etymology 158. Corporation 8,
    9.――Burgesses of, iii. 15. Road to Falmouth from 63. William Noye,
    attorney-general, M.P. for 152. John Rogers, M.P. 445.――Road from
    Truro to, iv. 4
  Helston castle, iv. 228
  ―――― church, ii. 136 _bis_, 192――iii. 384
  ―――― and Kerrier hundred, i. 38
  ―――― manor, i. 74
  ―――― manor in Kerrier, ii. 137, 401, and its stannaries 155
  ―――― in Trigg, ii. 137, 401, 404――iii. 223
  ―――― parish, i. 1, 3, 77, 115, 123, 136, 153, 356――ii. 140――iii. 47,
    127 _bis_, 128, 421, 441, 442, 443, 446 _ter._――iv. 6
  HELSTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor in Alfred’s
    days, a coinage town _temp._ Edward 1st, privileges, ii. 155. Form
    of writ, Castle-Werre, arms of the borough, Edward 1st frequented it
    for pleasure 156. Chief inhabitants, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, thunder-storm 157. By Tonkin, hospital ibid. By
    Editor, etymology, contest for elective franchise, first charter
    158. Payment of rates, election petition 159. Heraldic visitation,
    patron, representatives of borough, Reform Bill 160. Letter upon
    161. Church injured by a storm, new church, St. John’s hospital,
    removal of the coinage hall 163. Agreeable society, annual festival
    164. The foray 165. Musical air preserved from the British, and
    found in Scotland and in Ireland, statistics, and Geology by Dr.
    Boase 166
  ―――― tenants, i. 75
  ―――― village, ii. 405
  ―――― Chaumond manor, iii. 442
  Helvetians, i. 107
  Helya, prior of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  Helyar, Weston, iv. 9
  ―――― of East Coker, Somersetshire, Rachel, iii. 165. Weston 165
    _bis_, 346. Family 346
  Hemley of Trefreke, John and arms, i. 384
  Hendarsike, etymology, iv. 22
  Hender, i. 369, 370
  Hender, Elizabeth, iii. 233. John 233, 234 _bis_. Family, monuments
    to 233
  Hendersick, lands of, iii. 294
  Hendower family, iii. 198
  ―――― of Court family, heiress of, ii. 109 _bis_
  Hendra, his dream, ii. 300
  ―――― or Hendre, account of, i. 234――ii. 68
  Hendrawne, iii. 327
  Hendre, Mr. iii. 354
  Henemerdon, William de, iii. 428
  Hengar, account of, iv. 94, 98
  Hengist, i. 326 _bis_
  Hengiston Downs, iv. 6.――Abound with tin, lines upon, and a battle
    at, ii. 310
  Henlyn, iii. 177, 178. Possessors of 176, 177
  Hennaclive cliff, its height, iv. 18
  Hennah, Rev. Mr. of St. Austell, iv. 167
  Hennock vicarage, ii. 224
  Hennot, ii. 274
  Henrietta Maria, Queen, i. 398
  Henry 5th, Emperor, iii. 28
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 296――ii. 148, 239, 249――iii. 140, 332, 456, 462,
    463,――iv. 77, 82 _bis_, 169.――His daughter, i. 296
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 87, 147, 155, 170, 249, 415, 422, 426――iii. 139, 140,
    225――iv. 71, 81 _bis_, 82 _bis_, 84, 140
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 69, 89, 95, 118 _bis_, 119, 130, 145 _bis_, 149, 235,
    249, 403, 422――iii. 14, 15, 27, 140, 149, 268, 269, 316, 438――iv.
    15, 105 _bis_, 128.――His charter to Launceston Priory, ii. 426
  ―――― 4th, ii. 93, 107, 180, 235, 260 _ter._, 282, 394, 398――iii. 14,
    22, 27 _bis_, 66, 111, 117, 125, 129, 132, 134, 140, 225, 226, 302,
    307, 323, 374, 437, 438――iv. 16, 22, 43 _bis_, 44 _bis_, 68, 96,
    102, 112, 139, 153
  ―――― 5th, ii. 176 _bis_, 209, 212, 302, 386――iii. 7, 101 _bis_, 111,
    141, 269, 303, 316, 374, 436. Statue of 295――iv. 13, 101, 138, 143,
    144, 145 _bis_
  ―――― 6th, i. 169――ii. 39, 71, 89, 107, 149, 153, 182 _quat._, 183
    _bis_, 209, 235, 251, 260 _bis_, 299, 315, 335, 353, 354――iii. 101,
    116 _ter._, 141, 147, 255 _bis_, 294, 318, 323, 324 _bis_, 459――iv.
    43, 101, 132, 139, 141, 145 _bis_, 146, 156
  ―――― 7th, ii. 2, 43, 100, 108 _ter._, 109 _bis_, 114, 185, 186
    _bis_, 187, 188, 189, 190 _bis_, 191 _ter._, 235, 317, 335, 341,
    363, 386――iii. 27, 65 _bis_, 101, 102 _ter._, 103 _quat._, 104,
    134, 141, 177, 182, 193, 199, 213, 226, 324, 370, 393, 436――iv.
    45, 72, 161.――Insurrection to depose, i. 86.――Gothic architecture
    of his time, iv. 81
  ―――― 8th, ii. 53, 66, 70, 71, 72, 76, 87, 91, 94, 96, 109, 113, 119
    _bis_, 123, 139, 149, 157, 163, 169, 170, 171 _bis_, 176, 185, 191,
    194, 209, 235, 259, 275, 276, 277, 327, 335, 341 _ter._, 412, 414
    _bis_, 415, 420――iii. 7, 44, 90, 103 _quat._, 104, 105, 111, 133,
    134 _bis_, 139, 147, 148, 155, 158, 163, 170 _bis_, 181, 199
    _quat._, 206, 208, 210, 211, 214, 232, 238, 253, 278, 286 _bis_,
    317, 326, 370, 417, 437, 441, 446, 453, 459, 460――iv. 9, 15, 42, 57,
    68, 69, 72, 73, 97, 101, 112, 113 _bis_, 134, 155, 156, 161.――Built
    St. Mawe’s castle, tradition of, ii. 280. A frigate sunk in his
    sight near Portsmouth 342
  ―――― Prince, iii. 14
  ―――― Prince, son of the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  ―――― Prince of Wales, iii. 27, 213.――Farnaby dedicated his Horace
    to, iv. 87
  Hensall Cove, ii. 360
  Henshinius, iii. 332
  Henwood, Mr. iii. 100.――Family, i. 420
  ―――― of Lavalsa, Hugh, i. 421
  Herald’s office, iii. 316――iv. 77
  ―――― visitation, iii. 83――iv. 106
  Heraldic visitations, ii. 338, 423
  Heraldry, extract from Upton’s MS. upon, ii. 107
  Herbert, Lady Catherine, i. 265――Jane, ii. 107. John 160 _ter._
    William, Earl of Pembroke 107
  ―――― of Cherbury, Lord, ii. 348
  Herbert’s Festivity of Saints, i. 407
  Hercules, i. 341.――Breaking the horn of Achelous, ii. 161.――Pillars
    of, iv. 168
  Hereford, Stanbury, Bishop of, iii. 255
  ―――― Cathedral, ii. 33
  ―――― and Essex, Humphrey de Bohun, Earl of, i. 63
  Herland, copper mine, i. 226――ii. 143
  Herle family, i. 125, 394, 397.――Sir John the younger, and Polglass,
    iii. 294.――Mr. iv. 74. Family 107
  Herle of Landew, Edward, his character, Mary, Nicholas, Northmore,
    his death, iii. 41. Northmore 42
  ―――― of Prideaux, Edward, iii. 41 _ter._――Family, i. 397
  Herme, St. i. 393. His history 393
  ―――― St. parish, i. 202――ii. 5
  Hernecroft in Stratton, iii. 133
  Heron, Rev. John, of Stoke Climsland, iv. 7
  Herring, Major, J. B. i. 380. His grandson 381
  Hertford, Edward Seymour, Earl of, and Duke of Somerset, iv. 107
  Hertfordshire, ii. 64, 65
  Hertland, recluse of, iv. 158
  Hervey, Rev. Mr. composed his Meditations while curate of
    Kilkhampton, ii. 352
  Herygh, St. iii. 7 _bis_
  Herys of Herys, Henry and family, iii. 202
  Hesse Cassel, Landgrave of, his bargain for letting out troops, ii. 269
  Hessenford, road from Duloe to, iv. 30
  Hewish, Matilda de, iv. 112
  Hexham, battle of, ii. 260
  ―――― cathedral, iv. 43
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― shire, iv. 42, 43
  Hext, Samuel, and arms, i. 44. Mr. 45.――Francis, ii. 393. Rev. F. J.
    154――iii. 66. Nicholas 83
  Hexworthy barton, account of, iii. 2
  Heydon, Mr. an ornament to the country, ii. 388
  Heyes, Thomas, i. 9
  Heylston, by Leland, iv. 288
  Heywood, Anne and James, i. 347.――Sir John’s Chronicle, ii. 198――i. 339
  Hickens, Mr. ii. 124
  ―――― of Poltair, Mr. iii. 91
  Hickes, Cloberry, i. 23. Family 368.――Mr. ii. 259――iv. 74
  ―――― of Trevithick, John, i. 416. His father poisoned ibid. Stephen,
    accidentally shot 417
  Hickman, Mr. iv. 74
  Hicks, i. 61, 62.――Mr. iv. 68
  ―――― of Trenedick, John, iii. 44
  Hicks’s Mill village, iii. 38
  Hidrock, St. ii. 379 _bis_
  Hieroglyphicks of the Druids, i. 192
  Higden, Ralph, his Polychronicon, iii. 163
  Highlands, iii. 240
  Hilarius, Bishop of Poictiers, ii. 338
  Hilary point, i. 295
  ―――― St. i. 294, 395. Bishop of Poictiers 295 _ter._――His history,
    ii. 167
  ―――― or Hillary, St. parish, i. 88, 344, 355――ii. 80, 118, 307――iii.
    46, 306, 312.――vicar of, ii. 144
  HILARY, ST. parish, Hals’s history of the saint, ii. 167. By Hals,
    situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice 169. Tregumbo,
    Treveneage, borough of Marazion, ancient name, situation, Lord,
    court leet, member of parliament, franchise neglected, fair and
    markets 170. Land tax, French invaded, and took Mount’s Bay, burnt
    the town, and fled, defeated at sea 171. History of St. Michael’s
    Mount, former name, description 172. Lines upon, pilgrimages
    performed to, disruption from main land, submarine trees, spring
    173. Another spring, prospect from the top, Porth-horne, priory 174.
    Revenues, chapel, Michael’s chair, tombstones, solidity of the roof
    175. Built of Irish oak, proprietors, privileges, fairs, roads for
    anchorage, landing of Sir Robert Knollys 176. Seized by Pomeroy, his
    confederacy with Prince John 177. Stabs the messenger sent to arrest
    him, enters St. Michael’s mount by stratagem 178. Richard’s return,
    John’s submission 179. Pomeroy surrenders, and dies, Richard
    garrisons the mount 180. Vere family, dispute between the Lords
    spiritual and temporal 181. Wars of the Roses 182. Perkin Warbeck’s
    rebellion 186. Siege of Exeter 189. Priory of St. Michael’s mount
    191. Murder of Edward the 6th’s commissioner, Arundell’s rebellion
    192. Terms sent to the King 194. His answer 195. Second siege of
    Exeter 196. Sir Anthony Kingston, provost marshall 197. Church and
    house struck by a ball of fire, wonderful escape of Mr. St. Aubyn
    Whitaker’s name of the place 199. And etymology, nunnery 200.
    Leland’s notice of it 201. Church built by Edward the Confessor 202.
    The chair 204. Its use 205. History of the mount by Editor, the
    Ictis of Siculus, earliest tradition of the church, lofty situations
    dedicated to the archangel, St. Kenna imparts virtue to the chair
    206. St. Kenna’s well, Keynsham, ammonites at, supposed ancient site
    of the mount, subterranean trees 207. Dugdale’s account 208.
    Oliver’s notices, and tanners, St. Edward’s charter 209. Earl of
    Morton’s 210. King of the Romans 211. Pope Adrian’s bull,
    suppression of the monastery, proprietor since 212. Saint Aubyns
    have improved it, geological description 213. Description of the
    buildings, pier, connection of the mount with romances 214.
    Antiquity and history of Marazion 215. Considerable families there
    216. Treveneage, Tregembo 217. Tregurtha, Ennis, Trevarthen 218.
    Mines, church and its monuments 219. Mr. Palmer a recusant 220. Mr.
    Hitchins 221. Dr. Maskelyne’s astronomical voyage to St. Helena,
    Meyer’s astronomical tables 222. Nautical Almanack 223. Family of
    Mr. Hitchens 224. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    also of St. Michael’s mount 225
  Hilary, St. term, ii. 120, 334
  Hilda, St. petrified serpents, ii. 298
  Hill, Otwell, i. 46. Family 31, 210.――Sampson and his arms, ii. 136.
    Mr. 11.――Alan, iii. 193. Candia and Grace 191. Otwell 191, 193. His
    arms 191. Rev. Mr. of St. Maben 65.――Richard, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carwithenack, i. 241
  ―――― of Constantine, ii. 139
  ―――― of Croan, John and Michael, i. 371
  ―――― of Lancashire family, iii. 191
  ―――― of Lydcote family, iii. 252
  ―――― of Shilston, Oliver, i. 348
  ―――― of Trenethick family, and John, ii. 139
  HILL, NORTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, principal seats,
    Trebatha, ii. 226. Battin 227. By Editor, Trebartha 228. Treveniel,
    patron, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 229
  HILL, SOUTH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    ii. 229. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land-tax, Manaton
    230. By Tonkin, name, patron, incumbents, Kellyland manor, Manaton
    ibid. By Editor, Whitaker’s etymology of Manaton, proprietors
    of Kalliland, patron, church, rector, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 231
  Hillman, Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 208.――Rev. Mr. iv. 1
  Hills, the highest in Cornwall, i. 132
  Hilton manor, iii. 117 _bis_
  Hingston downs, i. 152 _bis_, 159――ii. 23. Kitt hill, the most
    elevated point of 312
  ―――― hill, i. 189
  Hippesley, Cox, John and Frances Susanna, ii. 250
  Hippia frutescens, iv. 182
  Hitchens, i. 282.――Rev. Malachi, ii. 144, 221, 224, 225. The
    Editor’s notices concerning 221. Filled the office of astronomer
    royal in Dr. Maskelyne’s absence 222. Assisted in compiling the
    Nautical Almanack 223. His family, Rev. Richard, Rev. Thomas,
    Malachy, Fortescue, Josepha 224. Mr. 259, 261.――Rev. Mr. of St.
    Hilary, iii. 34. Family 286
  ―――― of Trungle, Mr. iii. 288
  Hiwis family, ii. 256.――Emmeline and family, iv. 16
  Hoare, Sir Richard, i. 305
  Hoarn, iii. 403
  Hobart, Lord, ii. 361. Family 362.――Lord, iii. 5, 405
  Hobbs, i. 18, 78――ii. 57. Nicholas and his arms 54.――Rev. Thomas,
    iii. 213. William 355
  Hobby, Sir Thomas, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Hoblin, Mr. ii. 143
  Hoblyn, i. 45. Edward 216. John 107. Robert 216. Thomas 223.――Rev.
    Carew, iii. 136. Rev. Edward of Milor 231. Mary 136. Robert 347.
    Rev. Robert 77, 445. Family 192, 197, 445
  ―――― of Bodman, i. 172, 224, 371;――or Hoblin Bridget, ii. 389
  ―――― of Bradridge, ii. 57
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371. Damaris, Edward 376 _bis_. Of Crone, Damaris
    and Edward 260
  ―――― of Egleshayle, i. 224
  ―――― of St. Enedor, i. 224
  ―――― of Gurran, i. 224
  ―――― of Helland, i. 224
  ―――― of Kenwyn, John, i. 224
  ―――― of Leskeard, i. 223
  ―――― of Nanswhiddon, i. 160, 161, 223, 371. Anne, Carew 224. Edward
    223. Francis, Grace, John, and Mary 224. Richard 223. Robert 210,
    226, 223 _bis_. Rev. Robert 223, 226. Thomas 224. Arms 223.――Family,
    ii. 113――Edward and Richard, iii. 191. Robert 191, 196 _bis_
  ―――― of Penhale, i. 292
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s, i. 225
  ―――― of Tregleagh, i. 371
  ―――― of Trewheler, Edward, i. 387
  Hocken, Rev. William, of Phillack, iii. 343, 344
  Hocker, Rev. Mr. ii. 413.――Rev. William, of St. Mewan, iii.
    198.――Thomas, iv. 3. Mr. 4 _bis_
  ―――― of Trewanta, William, iii. 39
  Hockin, Miss, ii. 221.――Mr. iii. 223. Mr. of Gwithian 344
  Hockyn of Helland and Helston, iv. 95
  Hoddy of Pennance, Henry, i. 257
  Hodgson, Rev. Charles of St. Tudy, iv. 97
  Hoe, the, iii. 108
  Holcomb, Mr. iii. 211, 212, 215
  Holden, i. 410.――Rev. Mr. ii. 232
  Holinshed, i. 108, 246
  Holland, ii. 52, 270. Coast of 28. Peace of England and France with
    42. War with 245. Tobacco sold cheap in 42.――States of, iii. 186
  ―――― of Devon, family, ii. 304
  ―――― John, Earl of Huntingdon, i. 341.――Thomas, Earl of Kent, and
    Thomas, Duke of Surrey, iii. 27
  ―――― parish, i. 264
  Hollis of Houghton, Notts., Densill Lord Hollis; Gilbert and John,
    Earls of Clare, iii. 148. Sir William, ancestor of the Duke of
    Newcastle 147 _bis_
  Holrode, Eggerus de, ii. 426, 427
  Holwell, Rev. William of Menheneot, iii. 171 _bis_. His collection
    of pictures 171. His marriage and death 172. Rev. William of
    Thornberry, Glouc. and his works 171
  Holy hearth, iii. 90
  ―――― land, iv. 43
  ―――― Trinity churchyard, i. 134
  ―――― Trinity, knights of, i. 338
  ―――― war, ii. 177――iii. 129, 132――iv. 43
  ―――― well in Roach, iii. 393
  Holyhead, i. 295
  Holywell, i. 291. Description of 292
  Homer, iii. 417, 418, 420. Mr. Peters’s Vindication of 68. Holwell’s
    Beauties of 171. A curious translation from 418. Pope’s 420.
    Compared 171.――Macpherson’s, ii. 406
  Homer well, iv. 35
  Honey, Mr. iii. 20
  Honorius, Pope, iii. 284
  Hoo, Baron, i. 224
  ―――― of Hoo, William, i. 224
  Hooker, i. 108, 325. Richard 283. Robert 162 _bis_.――Mr. ii. 157, 420
  ―――― Zachariah, of St. Michael Carhayes, iii. 203. His arms 203
  ―――― of Trelisick, in St. Ewe, William and Miss, ii. 279
  Hope, Mr. i. 321
  Hopton, Lord, i. 44. Sir Ralph 113.――King Charles’s general, ii. 343
   _bis_.――iii. 17, 183, 184. Lord, the royalist general 81.
    Surrendered to Fairfax with 5000 men 189.――Sir Ralph, iv. 13, 14
    _bis_. Lord 14. His ancestor 14
  ―――― in the Hole, co. Salop, given to the Norman hunter, whose
    posterity took the name, iv. 15
  Hoquart, a French naval commander, iii. 218
  Horace, translation of, iii. 218.――Farnaby’s, iv. 87
  Horatius, a Roman tragedy, iv. 97
  Hore, of Trenowth, in St. Ewan, ii. 335
  Horestone or Orestone, iv. 28
  Hornacott manor, iv. 39, 41. A free chapel there 39
  ―――― family, iv. 41
  Horsey, Joan and Sir John, i. 65
  Horsham, Sussex, iv. 87
  Horsley, i. 183 _ter._
  Horton, prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  Hosatus or Husey, Henry, iii. 206
  Hosea, reference to, i. 80
  Hosken, Rev. Mr. ii. 89
  Hoskin, i. 364. Jochebed 363.――Rev. Mr. ii. 149 _bis_, 150. Henry 8.
    Miss, of Looe 249. Mr. and his son, Rev. Mr. mistook Schist for gold
    ore 21. Family 8.――Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― of Gwithian family, and Rev. Richard, ii. 147
  ―――― of Hellanclose, i. 293. Joseph 293
  Hoskins, James, iii. 358.――Rev. Nicholas, of Boyton, and Rev.
    Nicholas of Whitstone, iv. 153. John, of East Looe, and his dau. 37
  Hospital of St. James and of St. John at Bridgewater, ii. 412; and
    of St. John Baptist, at Helston 136
  Houghter, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  House of Lords, iii. 405
  Houses, foundations of, discovered under sand, iii. 6
  Hoveden, Roger, ii. 60, 180. His Chronicle 310
  Howard, Elizabeth, and Sir John, ii. 181.――Thomas, Duke of Norfolk,
    iii. 293――Sir Charles, iv. 41
  Howeis, ii. 159
  ―――― of Redruth, and Killiou, Edward, John, Reginald, Mr. arms, ii. 304
  Howell, i. 108.――Rev. Joshua, ii. 400. Mr. 142. Rev. Mr. universally
    esteemed 104.――David, iii. 337. Rev. Mr. of Pelynt 291.――Rev. Mr.
    iv. 29. Mr. 114
  Howlett, Sir Ralph, married a dau. of Sir Anthony Cooke, ii. 16
  Howse, Richard, ii. 189
  Hoya carnosa, iv. 182
  Hoyle, copper works at, iii. 343. Iron works 305. Trade of 343
  Hucarius, the Levite, ii. 62
  Huckmore, Miss, ii. 230
  Huddy, i. 243.――Family, iii. 355
  ―――― of Nethoway, i. 257
  Hudson, the botanist, ii. 331――iii. 173
  Hugh, St. history of, i. 414. Miracles done at his shrine 415
  Hugh, St. de Quedyock, parish and church, iii. 373
  Hughes, Rev. Mr. i. 258
  Huish, ii. 292
  Hull, ii. 76
  Hume, Lord, ii. 9
  Humphrey, i. 161
  Hungerford, Robert, Lord, ii. 397.――Elizabeth, Francis, Katharine,
    Mary, Sir Robert, and heiress, iii. 234. Family 353――iv. 136 _bis_, 143
  ―――― of Penheale, i. 378 _bis_
  Hunkin, John, iii. 16 _bis_
  Hunt, George, i. 101
  Hunt of Lanhidrock, George, ii. 381. George 382, 387. His taste 382
  ―――― of Mellington, Cheshire, Thos. ii. 381
  Hunter, the Norman, his posterity called Hopton, iv. 15
  Huntingdon, ii. 76
  ―――― John Holland, Earl of, i. 341
  Huntingdonshire, i. 369
  Hurlers, i. 178, 179, 183 _bis_, 184 _bis_, 187――iii.
    45.――Descriptions of, i. 184, 196
  Hurling at St. Merryn, iii. 179
  Hurricane, November 1783, i. 318
  Hurris, iii. 202
  Hurston, i. 116
  Hussey, Richard, his Life, and Mary his widow, ii. 34. John 382,
    383. Peter 358.――Rev. John of Okehampton, Devon, iv. 90. Father of
    Richard 89. His death 90
  Hutton, George, iii. 144
  Hy or Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Hy-Conalls, county of, in Ireland, iii. 434
  Hyde, Thomas de la, i. 340.――Edward Earl of Clarendon, iii. 351.
    Advised the imprisonment of Sir Richard Grenville, and gives a very
    unamiable character of him, ii. 345
  Hydrangea hortensis, iv. 182
  Hydrock, St. ii. 383
  Hylesbery castle, iv. 228
  Hypericum monogynum, iv. 182
  Hythe, a cinque port, ii. 38
  Hywis family, ii. 400

  Iä, St. name explained, iv. 313
  Iceland, i. 336
  Ictam island, ii. 4
  Ictis supposed to be St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 20
  Ida or Ide, St. iii. 334
  Idalberga, St. iii. 33
  Ide, St. manor of, ii. 256
  Ideless, de, family, ii. 316
  Igerne, Duchess of Cornwall, i. 327, 329, 330 _ter._, 331, 332
    _sex._
  Ilcombe, account of, ii. 346
  Ilfracombe, i. 131
  Ilia, an Irish saint, ii. 257
  Iliad, iii. 420
  Illigan, Illogan, Illugan or Illiggan parish, i. 160――ii. 380, 388,
    389 _bis_――iii. 145――iv. 128.――Living of, ii. 243――iii. 239
  Illogan parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ii. 234. Lordship of Tyhiddy, Basset
    family 235. Angove family 236. Carne Bray, Carne Kye 237. By Tonkin,
    Tehidy, Carnekie tinwork Nance 238. Tehidy 239. By Editor,
    etymology, St. Illuggen, Tehidy 240. Menwinnion copper mine, and
    populousness of the parish, iron tram-road, commenced by Lord
    Dunstanville on the jubilee 241. Basset family 242. Memoir of Lord
    de Dunstanville 243. Nautical affairs after the seven years’ war
    246. French Revolution 247. Peerage conferred on Sir F. Basset, his
    private character 249. Parish, statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 250
  Illuggen, St. ii. 240
  Impropriation of benefices, the first in England, iii. 114. Present
    number 115
  Inceworth manor, account of, iii. 105
  Index to Carew’s Survey of Cornwall, iv. 381
  Index Rhetoricus and Oratoricus, iv. 87
  India, iii. 187, 188 _bis_, 218.――Mr. Cole distinguished as an
    engineer in, iv. 9
  ――――, East, college, iii. 95
  ――――, East company, iii. 188
  ―――― fleet, iii. 187. Ship 187
  Indian Queens, i. 227 _bis_
  Ingangén, St. village, ii. 385
  Ingham, John de, i. 246
  Ingulphus, Abbot of Croyland, i. 240
  Inis Alga, iv. 67
  Inis Cathaig, iii. 434
  Iniscaw island, by Leland, iv. 266
  Inispriven, by Leland, iv. 287
  Inkpen family, iii. 346
  Inlet, ii. 430
  Inney river, iv. 70
  Innis, account of, i. 396; or Enys, ii. 93
  Innocent 3rd, Pope, i. 110, 312――iv. 36
  ―――― 4th, i. 176
  ―――― 5th, Pope, i. 110
  Inns of court, ii. 71
  Inquisition, i. 312, 315. Establishment of 311
  Inquisition of Oliver Sutton Bishop of Lincoln, and John de
    Pontifexia Bishop of Winchester, into the value of Cornish
    benefices, i. 16, 22, 32, 38, 42, 52, 60, 63, 107, 112, 115, 118,
    129, 135, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230, 236, 246, 253, 261,
    289, 294, 301, 304, 311, 316, 323, 344, 367, 377, 383, 386, 393,
    404, 407, 409, 413――ii. 36, 49, 59, 80, 86, 89, 92, 106, 118, 126,
    129, 141, 146, 151, 157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253,
    257, 273, 275, 282, 291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60,
    64, 75, 78, 101, 110, 118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 176, 182, 190,
    195, 198, 208, 222, 224, 237, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436,
    441, 448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 12, 19, 43, 48, 50, 52, 61, 63, 66,
    70, 93, 99, 110, 116, 124, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 161
  Inquisition, Wolsey’s, i. 22, 28, 32, 38, 42, 52, 61, 63, 107, 112,
    118, 129, 133, 135, 153, 160, 167, 174, 197, 202, 209, 213, 230,
    236, 243, 246, 253, 261, 289, 294, 301, 304, 308, 311, 316, 323,
    344, 367, 378, 383, 386, 393, 404, 407, 410, 413――ii. 36, 51, 59,
    80, 86, 89, 90, 92, 106, 116, 118, 126, 130, 136, 141, 146, 151,
    157, 169, 226, 230, 232, 234, 240, 251, 253, 258, 273, 275, 282,
    291, 299, 309, 315, 319, 332, 340, 354――iii. 60, 64, 75, 78, 101,
    118, 124, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195, 199, 208, 222,
    232, 237, 354, 391, 402, 419, 421, 425, 436, 441, 448, 462――iv. 1,
    7, 12, 19, 48, 50, 53, 61, 66, 71, 93, 97, 110, 116, 128, 131, 137,
    152, 155, 160, 164, 185
  ―――― post mortem, iv. 56
  Inscriptions made by Leland at St. Mawe’s castle, iv. 273
  Inspeximus, iv. 83
  Intrenchment at Trove, i. 143
  Intsworth, i. 36.――Manor, account of, iii. 251
  Inundations of sand, iii. 6
  Ipswich, ii. 76
  Ireland, I. 115, 295, 336, 373――iii. 277 _bis_, 290, 336, 342, 408,
    431, 433 _bis_, 434――iv. 173.――Kings of, i. 328.――St. Patrick, the
    Apostle of, ii. 65. Perkin Warbeck proclaimed Lord of 188. Cleared
    of serpents by St. Patrick 298. Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to
    people 342. Lord Robarts Lord Lieutenant of 379.――Apostle of, iii.
    364. Missionary saints of 7
  Irish channel, i. 60――iii. 254
  ―――― church, iii. 434
  ―――― court, ii. 188
  ―――― kings, ten maintained miraculously by St. Perran, iii. 313
  ―――― men, i. 295
  ―――― oak, St. Michael’s church built of, ii. 176
  ―――― saints, iii. 331
  ―――― sea, i. 230, 245, 289, 322, 382――ii. 48, 86, 145, 234, 257,
    282――iii. 11, 139, 175, 176, 237, 429――iv. 42, 52, 66, 164
  ―――― wars, iv. 75, 116
  Iron Acton, Gloucestershire, iv. 86
  Isaac, i. 325.――His Memorials of Exeter, ii. 189, 196――iv. 111
  Isabel, Princess, i. 130
  Isabella, Queen of Edward 2nd, ii. 142
  Isey, St. iii. 190
  Isidore, Cardinal, ii. 370
  Iske or Ex river, i. 342
  Isle of Wight, ii. 76
  Isleworth, poor of, iii. 153
  Issey or Issy, St. parish, i. 115, 212――iii. 334, 335
  ISSEY, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Mr. Tonkin’s
    character of Cornish attornies, the Warne suit, ii. 253. Guardian
    saint, St. Giggy’s Well, Halewyn, Cannall-Lidgye 254. Trevance,
    Trevorike 255. Carthew mine 256. By Editor, name of the church,
    impropriators, monuments, St. Ide manor, Blayble ibid. Statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 257
  Italian people, claim the appearance of St. Michael, ii. 172
  ―――― romances, ii. 214
  Italy, i. 206――ii. 244, 369, 371 _bis_, 372, 375――iii. 121, 171,
    186, 187, 401――iv. 101――Thomas Paleolagus retires to, ii. 367, 368.
    Removes from 370
  Ithal, King of Gwent, i. 10
  Iva, Dinas, i. 412
  ―――― St. iii. 342
  Ive or Ivo, St. i. 151. History of 412
  Ive’s, St. bay, ii. 150――iii. 5, 339.――Its sand composed almost
    entirely of powdered shells, ii. 262
  ―――― St. borough, ii. 128――iv. 58.――Charters, extent of franchise,
    arms, form of writ, ii. 258. Sir F. Basset’s cup, and inscription
    upon 259, 271. John Payne mayor of 198.――Members of Parliament for,
    Mr. Borlase, iii. 51, 84. James Halse 91. William Noye 143, 152. Mr.
    Praed 9, 10
  ―――― St. lordship, iii. 46, 123
  ―――― St. parish, i. 344――ii. 215, 224, 229, 237, 286――iii. 5 _bis_,
    7, 173, 371, 435――iv. 52, 53 _bis_. By Leland 267.――Its living, i. 354
  IVE’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, ii. 257. Patron, incumbent, rector, land
    tax, former name of the town, Pendennis Island, road for ships,
    Ludduham manor, borough of St. Ive’s, its franchise, arms, form of
    writ 258. Chief inhabitants, first charter, Trenwith 259. By Tonkin,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, former state of
    the town 260. Old chapel, roadstead, fishing, chief inhabitants,
    custom house officers, Trenwith 261. By Editor, present importance
    of the borough, methods of fishing for pilchards ibid. Manner of
    preserving, and nature of the fish 263. Pier, Praed’s Act, mode of
    preserving fishing nets, nets introduced from Dungarvon 264.
    Singular custom, Rev. Mr. Toup 265. Mr. Knill 266. His monument 267.
    Transport from the West Indies driven into St. Ive’s 268. Stephens
    family 269. Effect of reform bill, salubrity of the town, plague of
    1647, escape of the Stephens family, fever of 1786, cup given by Sir
    Francis Basset, inscription upon it, arms of the town 271. Church,
    view of the town, parish feast, St. Eury, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 272
  ―――― St. town, i. 228, 403 _bis_, 412――iii. 6
  Ivonis, St. or St. John Baptist, i. 409

  Jack, Richard, family, ii. 279
  Jackman, Rev. William, ii. 31――Hugh, iii. 327
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177
  Jackson, musical composer, iii. 220
  ―――― of Truro, Jane and John, i. 204
  Jacob, i. 241
  ―――― St. ii. 232
  Jacobstow parish, ii. 86――iii. 275, 352, _bis_, 353――iv. 59, 124,
    125, 131, 136
  JACOBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Penfon, ii. 232. By
    Tonkin, patron saint, etymology ibid. By Editor, from Lysons,
    Southcott ibid. Penhallam, Berry Court, history of Mr. Degory Weare
    233. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 234
  Jago, John, family, i. 10.――John, ii. 136, 137. Rev. E. V. 376. Rev.
    William 136, 137. Family 5
  ―――― of Innis, Agnes and Jane, i. 399. John 397 _bis_, 398 _ter._,
    399 _bis_. Itai 397, 399 _bis_. Arms 397, 399. Etymology 397
  ―――― King, i. 397
  Jagoe, i. 416
  Jamaica, iii. 219 _bis_. Expedition to 86. Mr. Price settled there
    86. Sir Rose Price visited 87.――Sir William Trelawney, Governor of,
    iv. 37
  James, Henry, i. 277.――Thomas, ii. 160 _bis_――Pascoe, iii. 387. Dr.
    Thomas, his Bodleian Catalogue, and Introduction to Divinity 155
  ―――― of St. Columb, Anne and Mr. iii. 445
  ―――― of St. Keverne, W. iv. 33
  ―――― King, ii. 10. His reign and death 100
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 30, 56 _bis_, 65, 66, 93, 95, 155, 213, 269,
    277, 294, 382――iii. 75, 81, 83, 92, 104 _bis_, 132, 134, 142, 163
    _bis_, 183, 184, 212, 239, 281, 303, 314, 318, 337, 350, 449,
    463――iv. 2, 34, 67, 87, 88, 140, 161
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 22, 112, 227, 258――iii. 143, 201, 237, 238, 268, 297,
    298 _ter._――iv. 72, 85.――Distich upon, i. 105
  ―――― 4th, King of Scotland, ii. 186
  ―――― St. the Apostle, ii. 107, 338――iii. 161. His day 161, 309.
    Festival 439. Images of 309
  ―――― St. chapel of, iii. 309
  ―――― St. church at Compostella, ii. 107
  ―――― St. minor church, i. 299, 300
  ―――― St. hospital at Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. hospital, Westminster, ii. 148, 149
  ―――― St. manor, Westminster, ii. 148. How obtained 145. Contradicted
    147. Exchanged for Conerton 140
  ―――― St. palace, Westminster, ii. 149
  ―――― St. priory, Bristol, i. 288――ii. 147, 148
  Jane, Nicholas, i. 215.――Thomas, ii. 16. Dr. William, Rev. Mr.
    Rector of Iron Acton, and Mr. schoolmaster, Truro 17.――Rev. Joseph
    of Truro, iv. 76. Mr. master of Truro school, was a native of
    Leskeard; Dr. William, Dean of Gloucester, his declaration 85.
    Epigrams on, and Rev. J. son of the master 86
  J’Ans, Wrey, ii. 416
  Jansen, Cornelius, a picture by, iii. 156
  Janus, image of, iii. 144
  Jasminus revolutum, iv. 182
  Jeffery, Rev. George, of Linkinhorne, iii. 44
  Jeffries, Henry, i. 272. Family 274
  Jeffry, John, i. 10
  Jenkin, Peter, i. 216.――Henry and Perkin, iii. 387. Mr. 91. Family 83
  Jenkins, Grace, i. 363.――Rev. David, ii. 115. Mary 308. Mr. 124
  Jenkyn, James, i. 223
  ―――― of Trekyning, i. 223. Anne and James 262. Peter 223.――Family,
    iv. 139
  Jennings, i. 36
  Jerusalem, i. 307, 382, 411――ii. 414
  ―――― Knights of St. John of, ii. 180
  Jesuit confessor to Louis 14th, ii. 407
  ―――― missionaries, supposed to know Pope Gregory’s letter to St.
    Mellitus, ii. 290
  Jesuits, a college of, iv. 86
  Jesus chapel, St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  Jew, Cornish for, ii. 200
  ―――― family, iii. 270
  Jews, their cruelty and consequent persecution in England, i. 414
  Jews’ houses, ii. 215
  Jewyn, John, i. 83
  Job, Editor’s remarks upon the book of, iii. 69
  John or Ivan, i. 2
  ―――― William, i. 277.――George, ii. 124.――Rev. Ralph, iii. 326.
    Family 94
  ―――― of Gaunt, iii. 65
  ―――― of Rosemorron and Penzance, George, iv. 166
  John, King, ii. 118, 130, 158, 249, 310, 423, 426――iii. 169,
    433――iv. 71 _bis_, 144.――Founder of Beaulieu Abbey, with his
    reasons, ii. 327.――Made Truro a coinage town, iv. 73. Built the
    coinage hall there 72.――Prince, afterwards king, ii. 180. His
    treason, possessed of several castles, pursued, fled, deprived of
    bis estates, submitted, was pardoned 179
  John, King of France, ii. 39
  ―――― a monk of Glastonbury, iv. 27
  ―――― St. the Baptist, iii. 316.――St. Andrew and St. Peter his
    disciples, iv. 100. Pointed out Jesus to them 101
  ―――― St. the Evangelist, ii. 64――iv. 165.――His emblem, an eagle, ii.
    363.――His gospel, iii. 408
  ―――― St. cognizance of the order of, ii. 163.――Knights of, i.
    296――ii. 180――iii. 78, 80
  John’s, St. college, Oxford, ii. 407
  ―――― St. hospital, Bridgewater, ii. 412
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Jerusalem, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital in London, iii. 441
  ―――― St. the Baptist’s hospital at Sithney, ii. 157――iii. 441 _bis_.
    Account of 441. Little known of, Leland’s account of, site pointed
    out by a stone 446
  ―――― St. parish, i. 32――iii. 101, 374
  JOHN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, ii.
    250. Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax.
    By Tonkin, manor of Intsworth 251. By Editor, Hals’s history of the
    Evangelists, real and legendary ibid. Tregenhawke manor by Lysons,
    patron, excavation in a cliff, church, statistics, rectors, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 252
  ―――― St. street, London, i. 411
  Johns, Henry, i. 273.――Stephen, ii. 55
  ―――― of Trewince, Stephen, ii. 57
  Johnson, Richard, i. 307.――Dr. iii. 49.――His correspondence with
    Macpherson, ii. 406.――Rev. W. M. of Perran Uthno, iii. 312. Mr. of
    St. Paul’s Churchyard 34
  Jolliffe, John, iv. 60
  Jone, i. 2
  Jones, Rev. Cadwallader, ii. 415. Edward, his Relics of the Welsh
    Bards 166.――Henry, iii. 429. Judge 144
  Jones of Wales, i. 416
  Jonson, Ben, ii. 22. His lines to Charles 1st, iii. 146
  Jope, Rev. J. i. 413――ii. 272
  Jordan of Dundagell, i. 331, 332
  Joseph, Michael, i. 86 _bis_.――iii. 388. Hanged, i. 87
  ―――― of Arimathea, St. iii. 262
  Jowle, i. 23
  Jubilee of 1809, ii. 241
  Julette, St. iv. 112
  Julian, St. iii. 55
  Juliana, i. 2
  Juliet, St. ii. 273. Account of 274
  Juliot, St. parish, ii. 86――iii. 232, 275
  Julius, St. Pope and Confessor, ii. 273, 274
  ―――― Cæsar, iii. 79――iv. 169
  Julyot, St. chapel, ii. 274 _bis_
  JULYOT, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, ii. 273. By Tonkin,
    patrons, saint 273. By Editor, saint from Whitaker ibid. Two St.
    Julyots, the present church formerly only a chapel, afterwards a
    parochial curacy, legend of the saint, her day, Rawle family,
    patrons of the benefice, statistics 274. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 275
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 274
  Juncus, St. not in the Roman Calendar, iii. 292
  Junius, letters of, ii. 245
  Jupiter, i. 295.――Ammon, ii. 297
  ――――’s thunderbolt, ii. 132
  Just, St. Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 279, 282. Account of 287
  ―――― St. Archbishop of Lyons, life of, ii. 279. His day 279, 280
  ―――― St. parish, i. 26――ii. 2, 50 _bis_, 265, 272――iii. 51, 242, 425
    _bis_, 428, 429――iv. 117.――Dr. Borlase, Vicar of, iii. 51
  JUST, ST. parish, near Penzance, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    saint, ancient state, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriator, land tax, etymology, Pendeyn, Bray, ii. 282. Chapel
    Carne Bray, view from, greatness of the Bray family 283. St. Ewny’s
    chapel, table of the seven kings 284. By Tonkin, Mayne Scriffer. By
    Editor, Pendeen ibid. Excavation near, Cove, Botallock, mines at
    285. Busvargus, impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Rev. J.
    Smyth the curate 286. Parish feast, history of St. Just 287.
    Celebration of birthdays 288. Letter from Pope Gregory to St.
    Mellitus 289. Statistics, vicar, patron, name, Geology by Dr. Boase
    290. Botallock mine, parish affords most specimens of British
    minerals, and abounds in interesting objects 291
  Just in Roseland, ii. 228.――Curacy, iii. 67
  JUST, ST. in Roseland parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient state, value of benefice, endowment, patron, ii. 275.
    Incumbent, land tax, borough of St. Mawe’s, courts leet, lords of
    the manor, two members, market, fair, arms, form of writ, castle,
    ii. 276. Emoluments of its officers, history of its governors 277.
    Lines on Capt. Rouse, emoluments of the officers at Pendennis castle
    278. By Tonkin, patron of living ibid. Treveres, Rosecossa,
    Tolcarne, by Editor, saint, comments on his history, his day 279.
    St. Mawe, his life, the castle, tradition of Henry VIII. Franchise
    conferred by Elizabeth, invariably a close borough till the Reform
    Bill 1832, 280. Corrack road, Leland’s inscription on the castle
    walls, advowson, incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 281
  Just, St. Pool, ii. 281
  Just, St. or Justinian by Leland, iv. 285
  Justicia adatota, iv. 182
  Justinian, Emperor, ii. 37
  Justus, St. Bishop of Rochester, iii. 284
  Jutsworth, i. 203
  Juvenal, iv. 87.――Sentiment of, iii. 273

  Kaine or Kayne, St. parish, iii. 13, 245
  Kainsham, ii. 292
  Kalerso, manor of, in Hilary and Sithney, iii. 359
  Kambton, now Camelford, ii. 402
  Kanane or Lelant, i. 2
  Karentocus, St. church, iv. 112
  Karn Boscawen, i. 141
  Karnbree castle, iv. 228
  Karnedon, ii. 427
  Katherine, Princess, daughter of Edward 4th, i. 64
  ―――― St. i. 157
  Kaye, Rev. Sir Richard, Dean of Lincoln, ii. 286
  Kea parish, iii. 222; or St Kea. Ferry to 212.――ii. 315, 357
  ―――― St. ii. 24. His history 306
  Keate, i. 405. Capt. Ralph 216. Etymology 224
  ―――― of Bosworgy, i. 224. Sir Jonathan, Capt. Ralph, and arms ibid.
  Kebius, St. honoured in his own country, ii. 338
  Keckewich or Keckewitch of Catchfrench, George, ii. 68 _bis_. John
    68. Arms, ib.――iii. 169
  ―――― of Essex, ii. 68――iii. 169
  Keckwitch of Tregleale, and arms, i. 372
  ―――― of Trehawke, i. 372. _See Kekewich_
  Keen, iii. 82. John 395
  ―――― of Roach, i. 234
  Keeper, Lord, ii. 52
  Kegwin family, iii. 216
  ――――of Newlyn, i. 148
  Keigwin, John, i. 109
  ―――― or Keigwyn of Mousehole, James, iii. 444. Jenken, killed by the
    Spaniards, the fatal ball preserved 287. John 86. John, his works
    288. Parthenia 86. Family 90, 288, 328. Estates sold 288
  Keir, Mr. ii. 219
  Kekewich, i. 131.――Mr. iii. 172. Mr. M. P. 19, 20.――Samuel, iv. 97
  ―――― of Hall, Mr. Peter, and arms, ii. 410
  ―――― of Trehawke, Peter, iii. 169. Miss 237
  Kelland Lands, ii. 294
  ―――― of Peynsford, Devon, ii. 385
  Kellaton parish, i. 153――iii. 161
  Kellaway of Egge, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  KELLINGTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, manor and borough, court
    leet, members to parliament, ii. 309. Arms, market, and fairs, form
    of writ, Hengiston Downs, battle at, tin in, Bray family 310.
    Creation of a knight banneret. By Tonkin, saint, etymology 311. By
    Editor, saint, life of St. Nicholas 312. Proprietors of the manor,
    legal mistake of the Earl of Orford 313. Statistics, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 314
  Kellio, i. 54 _bis_. Richard 54
  Kelliow, in Cornelly, iii. 361
  ―――― John, ii. 398.――Richard, iii. 41
  ―――― of Landlake, Christopher, and his arms, ii. 399
  Kelly, i. 383
  ―――― of Trewint, Thomas, iii. 170
  Kellyfreth, ii. 304
  Kellygreen manor, iv. 97
  Kellyland, account of, ii. 230, 231
  Kellyow, i. 319. Arms 320
  ―――― of Rosillian, i. 53
  Kellysberye castle, iv. 229
  Kelsey, i. 292, 293
  Kemell of Kemell, Elizabeth, Pearce, Pierce, and arms, i. 265
  Kempe, i. 8, 20――ii. 54, 58. Anna Coryton and Admiral Arthur 58.
    Rev. John, vicar of Fowey 48. Nicholas 54. Sir William 58. Mr. 97.
    Arms 54.――Arthur, and Rev. Charles T. of St. Michael Carhayes, iii.
    207. Family 75.――Robert, iv. 77
  ―――― of Carclew, Samuel, ii. 57
  ―――― of Chelsea, Nicholas, ii. 58
  ―――― of Lavethan in Blissland, Humphrey, ii. 56. Richard 58
  ―――― of Newington, Surrey, John, ii. 58
  ―――― of Olantigh in Wye, Kent, family, ii. 58
  ―――― of Penryn, James, i. 17――James and James, iii. 76. Jane 229.
    John 76. Samuel 225 _bis_, 228. Built a house at Cartlew 225, 228.
    Miss 74
  ―――― of Roseland, Miss, ii. 307
  ―――― of Rosteage, or Rosteague, Nicholas, ii. 58――iii. 76
  ―――― of Tregony, Richard, iv. 118
  Kempethorne, family monuments, iii. 255. Name 256
  ―――― of Tonacombe, family, iii. 255
  Kempton, ii. 81
  Ken, Thomas, Bishop of Bath and Wells, iii. 296, 299
  Kendall, i. 211.――Rev. Nicholas, ii. 393. Archdeacon Nicholas 391.
    Rev. Mr. 59. Monuments 391.――Charles, M.D. iii. 41. His daughter 42.
    Family monuments 253.――Rev. Mr. of Talland, iv. 38. Family 38
  ―――― of Killigarth, Archdeacon, iii. 41, 437
  ―――― of Medroff, Miss, ii. 89
  ―――― of Middlesex, Colonel James and his son, Thomas, and
    Archdeacon, iv. 23. Family 23
  ―――― of Pelyn, i. 205 _bis_. Rev. Nicholas 352.――Walter, ii.
    391.――Jane and Walter, iii. 186
  ―――― of Treworgye, i. 244, 318 _bis_, 319. John and Richard 318.
    Arms 319
  Kendred, i. 200
  Kenegie, account of by Editor, ii. 123, 124. Etymology 124
  Kenn, deanery of in Devon, iii. 372
  Kenna, St. ii. 207――iii. 120. A monk 206. She imparted virtue to St.
    Michael’s chair 206. To her well near Liskeard, her history,
    converted vipers into ammonites 207
  ――――’s, St. well, ii. 207
  Kennal manor, iv. 3
  Kenneggy, account of, by Hals, ii. 121, 122
  Kenrick cove, ii. 117, 331 _bis_
  Kensham family, ii. 320
  Kent county, i. 259――ii. 38――iii. 10, 284.――Coast of, iv.
    169.――People brave, i. 88. Rebels enter 87.――Lands drowned in, iii.
    310. Weald of 10
  ―――― Earl of, i. 87.――Hugo de Burgh, ii. 428.――Godwyn, iii. 310.
    Hubert de Burgh 349. Thomas Holland 27
  ―――― Ethelbert, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Nicholas, i. 12. Thomas 260.――John, killed by a thunderbolt,
    ii. 132
  Kentigern, St. i. 306
  Kenwen, Kenwin, or Kenwyn parish, iv. 70, 75, 79, 80, 92 _bis_
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80. Has a church of its own 76
  Kenwin parish, iii. 313. Three barrows and four barrows in 322
  Kenwyn church, iii. 367――iv. 76, 77, 80
  ―――― parish, i. 177, 202――ii. 298, 299, 302
  KENWYN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, Edles, St. Clare’s well, ii. 315.
    Tregavethan 316. By Tonkin, Tregarvethan ibid. Three barrows,
    Roseworth 317. By Editor, includes old Truro, nature of soil,
    Calenick and Cavedras smelting houses ibid. Manor of Newham,
    Bosvigo, Comprigney, church conspicuous and commanding a fine view,
    bells, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 318
  Kenyon, i. 391
  Keppell, Admiral, court martial upon, ii. 246. Bishop of Exeter 224
  Kerantakers, St. i. 249
  Kerhender, i. 2
  Keri, i. 2
  Kerrier hundred, i. 32, 118, 135, 236, 301――ii. 358――iii. 59, 74
    _bis_, 75 _bis_, 110, 111, 124, 224, 228, 257, 416, 419, 421, 441,
    442 _quat._――iv. 1, 2, 5, 377. _See Kerryer_
  ―――― and Helston hundred, i. 38
  Kerrocus, St. iv. 112
  Kerryer hundred, ii. 1, 80 _bis_, 92, 116 _bis_, 126, 129 _bis_, 136
    _bis_, 155 _bis_, 319. Etymology of 320
  ―――― manor and stannaries, ii. 155
  Kerthen, i. 266 _bis_
  Kestell, i. 370――iii. 110, 113.――Account of, i. 375――iii. 111
  ―――― John, iii. 112. Miss 76. Mr. and two daughters 112. Family 111,
    113. Arms 112, 113.――Edward, iv. 77
  ―――― of Kestell, i. 370. James and John 371, 375. Arms 371, 374.
    Crest 375
  ―――― of Manacow, i. 371
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 371 _bis_. Thomas 375
  ―――― of Wollas, i. 419
  ―――― of Wartha, i. 419
  ―――― river, i. 371
  Kestvaen found near Pelynt, iv. 32
  Keverines, St. by Leland, iv. 270
  Keverne, St. visits St. Perran, ii. 324
  ―――― church, its lofty situation, spire destroyed by lightning, ii. 325
  ―――― parish, ii. 250――iii. 332, 419
  KEVERNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, remarkable
    places, Treleage, ii. 319. Treland, Condura, and Tregarne manors,
    Lanarth, singular shipwreck 320. Treatment of the wrecked by the
    French 323. Arrival of a boat from Ireland 324. By Editor, St.
    Keverne, numerous coves, Coverack, Porthonstock, Porthalla, shoal
    of pilchards 324. Situation of church, spire destroyed by
    lightning during divine service, monuments, sarcophagus to the
    memory of Major Cavendish and his companions 325. Supposed cause
    of their wreck, tithes, Kilter 326. Lanarth, former impropriation,
    property of Beaulieu abbey at its dissolution, King John’s charter
    to it 327. With translation 328. Afforded sanctuary to Queen
    Margaret, and to Perkin Warbeck, incumbent of this parish 329.
    Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, geological interest of the
    Lizard, fragmentary rock near Bostowda 330. Cliffs bold, beautiful
    heath in the serpentine formation 331
  Keveryn, St. by Leland, iv. 288
  Kevorall, iii. 119
  Kevorne, St. i. 39――iii. 124
  ―――― parish, iii. 128 _bis_, 416, 421
  Kew, St. his history by Tonkin, ii. 337
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― or Kewe, St. parish, i. 168, 173, 382――iii. 64, 74, 240――iv.
    42, 44, 93, 94, 95 _ter._
  KEW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax,
    chief places, Lanew, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Bokelly, Trearike
    335. Dower bank, Tregeare, Penpons, Chappell Amble, Middle Amble
    336. By Tonkin, patron saint, impropriator 337. Incumbent, ancient
    name 338. By Editor, St. Kew or Kebius, parish fertile, situation of
    church, Skinden, Trewane ibid. Pedigree of Nicholls, impropriation
    of tithes, advowson, monuments in church, Editor the descendant of
    Attorney-General Noye, statistics, incumbent 339. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 340
  Key cross, ii. 300
  ―――― manor, account of, ii. 305
  ―――― or Keye parish, i. 76, 241――ii. 129
  KEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ii. 298.
    Ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbents, land tax, chief
    places, Nansavallan 299. Guddarne, strange story of Mr. Bauden,
    Kelleho, Trelogas 300. Burrow belles, and three other burrows,
    opened, and stone tomb found within, Curlyghon 301. By Tonkin,
    etymology, church a daughter to Kenwyn, patron, incumbents, manor of
    Blanchland, mines upon, lawsuit about 302. Guddern, Nansavallan,
    Kelliou 303. Trevoster, Kellyfreth, Chasewater 304. Manor of Key
    305. By Editor, saint, his boat, Nansavallon ibid. Farm improved,
    Killiow, removal of church 306. Mr. Reginald Haweis, curious
    coincidence 307. Trelease, Carlian the birth-place of Sir Tristrem,
    Chasewater, its chapel, statistics 308. Vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    Baldue mine 309
  Keyewis, ii. 315
  Keyn, or Keyne, St. i. 316. British, daughter of Braghan King of
    Wales, account of by Hals, ii. 292. By Tonkin 293. Keyne, Saxon,
    account of by Hals 292. By Tonkin 293. Both may be the same 294
  KEYNE, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, incumbent, ii. 291. Land tax, saint, her history,
    another St. Keyne, Copleston family 292. By Tonkin, the two saints
    293. By Editor, ancient name from Lysons, proprietors of the manor,
    St. Keyne’s well, lines on, from Carew 294. Remarks by Tonkin,
    Bond’s account of 295. Southey’s lines upon 296. The petrified
    serpents are Cornua Ammonis 297. St. Hilda and St. Patrick’s
    miracles, the snakes had no heads, St. Brechan, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 298
  Keyne’s, St. well, account of by Carew, and verses on, ii. 294. By
    Tonkin and Bond 295. Southey’s verses on 296
  Keynesham, ii. 293. Cornua Ammonis abundant in 297
  Keynock castle, iv. 228
  Khalcondylas’s account of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Kiaran, or Kenerin, St., (Perran) iii. 331
  Kidlacton, ii. 427 _bis_
  Kieran, Bishop, ii. 319
  ―――― St. rectory, ii. 319
  Kigan, iv. 76
  Kilcoid lands, ii. 394
  Kildare, Earls of, i. 34. Charles, Earl of 297
  Kilgal family, iv. 36
  Kilgather, ii. 394
  ―――― parish, ii. 398
  Kilkhampton manor, possessed by the Grenvilles nearly from the
    Conquest, ii. 343
  ―――― parish, ii. 413――iii. 118, 254, 256, 349, 351――iv. 15, 19
  KILKHAMPTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Stowe, ii. 340. Grenville
    family, erection of Bideford bridge, loss of the Mary Rose frigate
    341. The Grenvills 342. Battle of Lansdowne, Orcott. By Editor,
    account of the Grenville family 343. Gallant encounter of Sir
    Richard Grenville with the Spaniards of Terceira 344. Mansion at
    Stowe, Ilcombe 346. Alderscombe, Elmsworthy, monuments in the
    church, description of one to Sir Beville Grenville 347. Patron of
    the living, character of Sir Beville 348. His letter to Sir John
    Trelawney 349. Family continued 350. Dispersion of the materials of
    Stowe, Alderscombe 351. Hervey’s Meditations composed here,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 352. Extracts from
    the register 348
  Killaloe, diocese of, iii. 434
  Killas hills, iii. 11
  Killaton parish, ii. 229
  Killcoid, i. 264
  Killiganoon, etymology and history of, ii. 34
  Killigarth, i. 262 _bis_, 264.――Miss, ii. 398
  Killignock, or Checkenock, iv. 139
  ―――― Thomas and his daughter, family, iv. 139
  Killigrew barton, i. 399 _quat._, 403, 411. Account of 398
  ―――― i. 136. John 93. Sir John 136. Sir Peter 137 _bis_. Sir William
    65. Monuments 136――ii. 5, 372, 376. Family descended from Richard
    King of the Romans 8. Lords of Pendennis castle 17. Slighted by Hals
    21. Represented by Lord Wodehouse 23. Founded the hospital of St.
    John at Helston 163. Ann 22. George 5 _bis_. Killed 5. Henry 5, 22.
    Sir Henry 7 _bis_, 15, 372, 373 _bis_, 376. Obtained from the Bishop
    of Exeter, the manor of Kirton, now gone from the name 7. His
    marriage 15. Appointed ambassador to Henry 4th of France, his wife’s
    Latin letter to her sister Lady Cecil 16. His daughter married to
    Sir Jonathan Trelawney 16. Ambassador to Venice or Genoa 372. Jane,
    widow of Sir John, murders two Spanish merchants, tried and
    convicted, pardoned, but her accomplices sentenced to death 6. Gave
    a silver cup to the mayor of Penryn 7, 97. Her story cannot be true
    21. John 5. Built the town of Falmouth 8. Opposed by the
    neighbouring boroughs 9. Proceeded with the King’s approbation 10.
    Sir John 5, 7. Jane his widow 6. Fired his own house 17. Maugan 5.
    Peter 5. Sir Peter 5 _ter._, 6, 147. Built a church at Falmouth 3.
    Annexed the advowson to his manor of Arwinick, buried in the
    chancel, gave a house and garden to the rector, and a pulpit cloth
    to the church 4. Procured a charter of incorporation for the borough
    8. Thomas, jester to Charles 2nd 14. His reply to Lewis 14th,
    Reproof of Charles’ extravagance turned against William 3rd, and his
    court 15. Degraded by common report, his history from the
    Biographical Dictionary 21. Son of Sir Robert 21. An author, buried
    in Westminster Abbey, the reverse of Cowley, epigram upon both 22.
    William 23. Sir William, Bart., wasted his estate 5. Lady 373. Mr.
    20. Arms 7.――Sir Henry and his daughter, iii. 169. M. L. and Sir
    Peter 228. Sir William 75. Mr. founder of St. John’s Hospital,
    Sithney, family 75 _bis_
  Killigrew, of Arwinick, Jane Lady, ii. 97.――George, iii. 417. Sir
    Peter 417 _bis_. Miss 147
  ―――― of Killigrew, i. 398. Sir John 398, 399
  Killington church, ii. 230
  ―――― parish, iv. 6, 7
  Killingworth, iv. 24
  Killiton borough, court leet, members of parliament, and mode of
    election, ii. 309. Election of mayor, arms, market and fairs, form
    of writ. Sir Edward Bray lived at 310
  Killrington, Alice and Walter, i. 262
  Killter of Kevorne killed a royal commissioner, ii. 192
  Killygarth, ii. 181.――Barton, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 38
  ―――― manor, iv. 21, 22 _bis_, 23, 36, 38
  Killygrew, Sir Peter, Bart., iv. 72. Mr. 22
  Killyow, account of, by Hals, ii. 300. By Tonkin 303. By Editor 305
  ―――― of Killyow, ii. 303
  ―――― of Lanleke, ii. 303
  ―――― of Rosiline, ii. 303
  Killyquite. _See Colquite_
  Kilmarth, iv. 109
  Kilmenawth or Kilmenorth, iv. 36
  Kilminarth, celt found at, iv. 33
  ―――― woods, iv. 29
  Kilter, account of, ii. 326
  ―――― Mr. concerned in Arundell’s rebellion, ii. 326
  Kilwarby, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 83
  Kilwarth hill, description of, i. 189. Ascent to the highest points
    190, 191. Etymology 193
  Kilworthy near Tavistock, ii. 230
  Kinance cove, iii. 259, 260. Its beauty 259
  King, the, iii. 223
  ―――― or Kings of England, i. 139.――ii. 59, 272. Annals of 60
  ―――― Charles 2nd, at Boconnoc, i. 113, 114 _ter._ His speech to Sir
    F. Basset 114
  ―――― George packet, iii. 229
  King, i. 270, 413. Elizabeth 222. Oliver and arms 204.――Degory, ii.
    253, 254. Edward, his Munimenta Antiqua, and hypotheses of the
    extreme antiquity of Lanceston Castle 423 _bis_, 424. Philip 423.
    Mr. 377. Family 217.――Lord Chanceller, iii. 51
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 204. Henry ibid.
  King’s army, iv. 186
  ―――― books, i. 320――ii. 123, 146, 356, 391, 394 _bis_, 398, 413,
    417――iii. 14, 22, 24, 37, 40, 44, 46, 56, 116, 126, 182, 188, 224,
    255, 257, 260, 267, 276, 284, 291, 306, 313, 334, 339, 345, 347,
    349, 352, 372, 374, 380, 396, 405, 419, 423, 426, 431, 437, 443, 450
    _bis_, 457 _bis_――iv. 7, 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 75, 95, 102, 112,
    117, 118, 129, 140, 153, 157, 162
  King’s College, Cambridge, i. 146――ii. 153, 209, 244
  ―――― road, ii. 1. In Falmouth harbour 275, 281
  Kingdon, Rev. T. H. i. 135.――Robert, ii. 416.――G. B. iii. 351. Rev.
    John of Marham church 117 _bis_.――G. B. character of, iv. 16. Rev.
    John of Whitstone 154
  Kingfisher ship, iii. 187
  Kingills, King of the West Saxons, ii. 284
  Kingston, iii. 108
  ―――― Sir Anthony, i. 88.――Provost marshal, ii. 197. Taxed with
    extreme cruelty 198
  Kirkham, i. 260. Mrs. Damaris 376
  Kirton, Bishop of, i. 116――iii. 1.――Levignus, ii. 60. Lurginus 62
  ―――― bishopric, i. 231――ii. 61 _bis_, 299
  ―――― see of, iii. 456
  ―――― manor alienated from the see of Exeter, ii. 7
  Kist Vaen, iii. 319
  Kit or Kitt hill, i. 122, 159――ii. 314
  Kitson, Rev. Walter, i. 409
  Kivell, Ann, iii. 77.――Thomas, ii. 241
  Knava, Ralph, i. 121. Etymology 122
  ―――― of Godolphin, John, i. 122
  Kneighton’s Kieve, i. 343
  Knicker, i. 317
  Knight, John, iii. 319, 327
  ―――― of Gasfield Hall, Essex, iii. 192
  Knights banneret, mode of creation of, ii. 311
  ―――― hospitallers, iv. 48, 50.――Account of, i. 410
  ―――― of the Round Table, i. 339 _bis_. Instituted 336
  ―――― Templars, iii. 83. Of Jerusalem, iv. 48 _bis_, 49
  Knighton, St. iv. 155
  Knill, John, eccentric, ii. 128. His life and mission to the West
    Indies 266. Privateering, humane, built a pyramid for his own
    burial, but was buried at St. Andrew’s, Holborn 267. His
    character 268
  Kniverton of Treadreath in Lelant, iv. 4
  Kniveton, Thomas, iii. 6
  Knollys, Sir Robert, a valiant commander under the Black Prince, ii. 176
  Kradock ap Ynir, King, iv. 44
  Kurie, St. Eleeeson, i. 315
  Kusterus’ Suidas, ii. 266
  Kynans cove, beauty of its rocks and caverns, and its rare plants,
    ii. 360
  Kynock castle, i. 77, 88, 94
  Kyvere Ankou, i. 9

  Laa, i. 44. Anecdote of Mr. and Mrs. ib.
  Lacy, Walter de, iii. 405
  Ladoca, St. history of, ii. 353
  Ladock manor, ii. 354
  ―――― parish, i. 386――iii. 354, 450.――Rector of, Mr. Pooley, ii. 34
  LADOCK parish, or Lassick, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, ii. 352. Boundaries, name, value of benefice, patrons,
    incumbent, manor of Nanreath, Hay, Boswaydel, Bedoke or Bessake 353.
    By Editor, value of benefice, village of Bedock, Pitt property,
    Trethurfe, Nansaugh, Hay, manor of Bessake, Rev. John Eliot 354.
    Beautiful vale, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 355. Stream
    tin and gold 356
  ―――― valley, iii. 189
  Lady chapel, ii. 201
  Lahe, i. 144
  ―――― Rev. John, Rector of Lanivet, character and memoir of, ii. 388.
    William lost at sea, his brother died of consumption 389.――John
    Bishop of Chichester, iii. 295. One of the seven 299
  Lalant or Kananc, i. 2
  Lamana chapel, iii. 245
  La Mayne, free chapel of, iv. 26
  Lamb, two brothers made a great fortune, ii. 47
  Lambert, William, Prior of St. Michael’s Mount, the last Prior, ii.
    209.――Elizabeth, iii. 86
  Lambessa, in St. Clement’s, family seat of the Footes, iv. 90
  Lambesso, i. 207. Account of 203
  Lambeth palace, iii. 71, 73. Archbishop’s chapel at 296
  Lambourn manor, i. 10――iii. 318 _bis_, 325. Account of 316, 319
  Lambourne town, iii. 318 _bis_, 319, 321, 324
  Lambrigan, iii. 314, 319, 324. Or Lambourne Wigan, account of 314
    Lower town of 315
  Lambron of Lambourn, Amara, iii. 317. John 316 _bis_. Sir John and
    Sir John 316. Sir John 320. William 316. Family 316, 317 _bis_. Arms 316
  Lamburn, Sir William, i. 213.――Family, ii. 80
  Lamburne, heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Lamburne, i. 120
  ―――― parish in Peran, iii. 317
  Lamelin of Lamelin family, Margery, Thomas, arms, ii. 411
  Lamellin manor, ii. 411――iii. 20.――Account of, ii. 411
  Lamellyn, ii. 89――iii. 169
  Lametton, ancient name of St. Keyne parish, ii. 294
  ―――― manor, ii. 294
  Lammana, a cell for Benedictine Monks at, its chapel remains,
    described, iv. 25
  ―――― island, iv. 26
  Lamoran manor, ii. 356. Account of 357
  ―――― or Lammoran parish, iii. 180, 207, 222. Or Lamorran, i. 242
  LAMORAN parish, Hals’s Manuscript by Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, saint, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Lamoran, ii. 356. By Editor, value ibid. Two villages, Tregenna,
    Lamoran manor, advowson, situation of church, monuments, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, rector, patron 357
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Lamorrick village, ii. 385
  Lampeer, i. 204
  ―――― of Truro, his unfortunate end, ii. 30
  Lampen, i. 205.――Rev. Robert, iii. 370
  Lamplugh, Archbishop of York, iii. 296, 297
  Lalant, by Leland, iv. 285
  Lanante, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lanarth, account of, by Hals, ii. 320. By Editor 327
  Lanbaddern, heir of, iii. 140
  Lancar, i. 83
  Lancashire, ii. 112
  Lancaster castle, ii. 179, 257
  ―――― John, Duke of, ii. 259
  ―――― Earl of, Thomas, ii. 363.――Edmund, iii. 19
  ―――― house of, ii. 108, 185, 186
  Lance, i. 394, 395. Richard 205
  ―――― of Penare, i. 204
  Lancells barton, ii. 415
  ―――― house, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 414
  ―――― parish, or Launcells, iii. 111, 118
  LANCELLS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, patron, value, ii. 413. Incumbent, earlier value,
    appropriation, Lancells manor 414. By Editor, cell of Austin canons,
    Hartland abbey, descent of property in the parish by Lysons 415.
    Manor of Norton Rolle, of Yellow Leigh, of Thorlibeer, of
    Mitchell-Morton, Tre Yeo, situation of the church, Chamond monument,
    Lancell’s house, destroyed, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  ―――― Prior of, ii. 49
  Lanceston, or Launceston, ii. 87, 98, 377, 378, 430 _bis_. The
    Royalists march into Somersetshire from 343.――Charles 1st. advanced
    to, iv. 185
  ―――― assizes, ii. 333. Trials at 52, 331, 336
  ―――― castle, description of, ii. 421, 423――iv. 229.――Its extreme
    antiquity, ii. 423
  ―――― Court of Common Pleas at, ii. 53
  ―――― domui, i. 112
  ―――― mayor of, his feudal service, ii. 229
  ―――― parish church, ii. 420
  ―――― priory, ii. 377. Account of 425. Its church and monuments, its
    destruction 425. Loss of archives and charters 426. Revenues 428,
    429. Horton and Stephan, priors of 419
  Lancherit, iii. 139
  Lancorla, iv. 138 _bis_
  Landaff, Bishops of, St. Theliaus, i. 321. St. Dubritius and their
    Constat 382
  ―――― cathedral, built by St. German, ii. 65
  ―――― church of, ii. 172
  Landawidnick, ii. 116
  Landegey or Landegge parish, the same as Key, ii. 299, 305, 315
  Landedy and Lanner in St. Key, iii. 359
  Lander, the two African travellers, are from Truro, their discovery
    of the course of the Niger, monument erecting to, iv. 90
  Landeveneck monastery, ii. 129 _bis_
  Landew, ii. 418――iii. 41. Account of 40. Monuments of the possessors 43
  ―――― family, iii. 42
  Landewednack parish, iv. 53
  LANDEWEDNACK parish, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 357. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, value, patron, manor of Lizard. By Editor,
    Church town and Lizard town, villages, manor of Tretheves, Mr.
    Fonnereau, lighthouses 358. Statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase. Cliffs interesting 359. Perranbonse and Hensall coves,
    geology by Editor, soap rock, native copper, Kynan’s cove, beautiful
    assemblage of rocks, natural caverns, rare plants 360. Instances of
    longevity by Dr. Borlase, spar manufactory 361
  Landigey or Landithy, iii. 83, 90. Account of 80
  Landisfarne, i. 289, 290
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 290
  ―――― bishoprick, transferred to Durham, i. 290
  Landowednack Lizard, i. 348
  ―――― parish, iii. 128, 259, 424
  Landrak, ii. 59
  Landrake parish, i. 103――ii. 277.――Or Lanrake, iii. 345, 347, 461
  LANDRAKE parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, patron, manor of Lanrake, ii. 361. By Editor,
    manor, churchtown, church, monuments in, Wotton cross, Tidiford,
    small river, tradition of Tidiford, Plymouth limestone burnt, its
    value in agriculture, Wotton 362. St. Erney 363. By Editor,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 364
  Land’s End, i. 132, 138, 228, 359――ii. 149, 182, 225 bis 237, 247,
    283, 284, 408――iii. 6, 11, 99, 120, 265, 309, 310, 428, 430,
    445――iv. 165, 166, 168, 173, 174. Road to, i. 20.――Anciently
    called Bolerium, ii. 20. Road from London to 317.――Description of,
    iii. 429. District 427. Various names of 431. Granite rocks at,
    scene, latitude and longitude, sun at 432. Its inscriptions 433.
    _See Dartmoor_
  Land tax, iii. 75, 110, 119, 128, 139, 161, 168, 177, 182, 190, 195,
    199, 208, 222, 237, 271, 391, 403, 419, 421, 425, 428, 436, 441,
    448, 456, 462――iv. 1, 7, 13, 19, 20, 39, 43, 53, 59, 63, 66, 68, 71,
    93, 99, 111, 128, 131, 137, 152, 155, 160, 164, 185.――Act for
    redeeming, i. 403. Fixed for Cornwall 1
  Landulph parish, i. 103, 310――iii. 345.――Rev. F. V. J. Arundell,
    rector of, ii. 387
  LANDULPH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 364. Etymology, value, patron 365. By Editor, situation of
    church, monuments, one to Theodore Paleolagus, history of him by Mr.
    Arundell ibid. His dynasty 366. Causes of his removal from Italy
    370. His marriage, issue, and residence at Clifton in this parish
    372. Death 373. Chasm in the register, discrepancy in the dates of
    Theodore’s death, account of his children 374. Manors of Landulph
    and Glebridge, Clifton 375. Lower family, life of Dr. Bradley,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 376
  Landuwednac, name explained, iv. 314
  Landy, St. ii. 358
  Lane, Rev. Mr. and his wife, died of a violent fever raging at St.
    Ives, ii. 271
  ―――― village, i. 20
  Laneast parish, i. 197――iii. 461――iv. 63 _bis_, 69, 70
  LANEAST parish, MS. of Hals lost, ii. 376. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, impropriation 377. By Editor, villages, Tregeare,
    impropriation, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase, Letcot mine of
    manganese 378
  ―――― village, ii. 377
  Laner castle, iv. 228
  Lanescot and Fowey Consols, iv. 110
  Laneseley church, ii. 118
  ―――― manor, ii. 118, 119 _ter._, 176. Account of 120, 121
  Lanest, ii. 430 _bis_
  Lanew barton, account of, ii. 332. Lawsuit for 333. Sold 334
  Lanewa, account of, i. 418
  Lanfrank, Archbishop of Canterbury, i. 110
  Langden, Walter, iii. 358
  Langdon of Keverill, Walter, iii. 123
  Langford, Humphrey, and daughters, iii. 116. Family 116
  ―――― of Swadle Downes, Devon, Walter, iii. 116
  ―――― of Tremabe, Samuel, i. 177
  ―――― hill, iii. 116
  Langhairne, De, family, ii. 316 _bis_. Arms 316. Lost their property
    in the civil wars 317
  Langherne of Trevillon, i. 400. Thomas ibid.
  Langland, John, Bishop of Lincoln, i. 233
  Langley, Mr. of York, ii. 286
  Languit, etymology of, ii. 332
  Lanhadern, account of, i. 415
  ―――― of Lanhadern, i. 415 _quat._ Serlo de, and Serlo Lord 415
  Lanhearne, Alice, John de, iii. 149
  Lanhedrar, account of, i. 419
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Serlo de, Baron, i. 419
  ―――― Lower, account of, i. 419
  Lanhengye chapel, i. 218
  Lanher, etymology of, and bishop’s palace at, i. 15
  Lanherne, i. 213.――Manor, ii. 145.――Account of, iii. 139,
    149.――Butler or Pincerna, Lord of, ii. 145
  ―――― Roman catholic establishment at, a refuge for nuns, iii. 150.
    Descended lineally from before the Conquest 151. Church near it
    ibid.
  Lanhidroc, i. 113
  Lanhidrock church, iii. 177.――Or Lanhydrock, i. 74
  ―――― house, account of, Editor remembers it, ii. 382. Housekeeping
    at 383
  ―――― manor, ii. 383
  ―――― parish, ii. 384, 390. Or Lanhydrock 187――iv. 74, 161, 187.
    Essex quartered at 185
  LANHIDROCK parish, MS. of Hals lost, by Tonkin, situation, ii. 378.
    Boundaries, saint, manor, residence built by Lord Robarts, Earl
    of Radnor 379. His pedigree, Trefry 380. By Editor, Robarts family
    381. Lanhidrock house, impropriation of benefice 382. Hospitality
    of Lord Radnor, possessors of the manor, statistics 383. Geology
    by Dr. Boase 384
  Lanhudnow, i. 349
  Lanick, i. 199
  Lanisley or Lanistley, ii. 121. Etymology 123
  Lanivet church tower has no pinnacles, ii. 386
  ―――― hill, ii. 390
  ―――― parish, ii. 379, 390――iii. 55, 395
  LANIVET parish, Hals’s manuscript lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patrons, incumbent, Tremere estate,
    ii. 384. By Editor, several villages 385. Church, monuments, patron
    and rector, St. Bennet’s convent 386. Landed property of the parish,
    select vestries, Rev. John Lake, rector 388. His family, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 389. Lanivet hill 390
  ―――― village, ii. 385
  Lank Major, i. 131
  ―――― Minor, i. 131
  Lankinhorn, ii. 428
  Lankinhorne, vicar of, iii. 457
  Lankynhorne, ii. 430
  Lanlaran (now St. Lawrance), i. 77
  Lanleke, in South Pederwyn, ii. 398, 418
  Lanlivery parish, ii. 41, 88, 379, 384――iii. 24, 26, 29, 55, 56――iv.
    99, 110
  LANLIVERY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    ii. 390. St. Vorch, value of benefice, patron, incumbent. By Editor,
    conspicuous monuments in church, Pelyn house, summer house, St. Chad
    391. Portrait and inscription, Restormel castle, Richard King of the
    Romans kept his court there, titles, palace at Lestwithiel 392.
    Restormel house, statistics, vicar, and Geology by Dr. Boase 393
  Lanmigall, ii. 169, 175
  Lanmigell, i. 118, 261――ii. 80
  Lannan, i. 292
  Lannant parish, iii. 5
  ―――― or Lelant town, by Leland, iv. 267
  Lannar, Miss, iii. 125
  Lannyvet parish, iv. 160
  Lanowe, the ancient name of St. Kew parish, ii. 338. Etymology 332
  Lanrake manor, account of, ii. 361, 362
  Lanreath manor, account of, ii. 395. Sold 396
  ―――― parish, iii. 291, 302, 347――iv. 29, 110, 111, 115, 155.――Or
    Lanethon, ii. 398
  LANREATH parish, otherwise Lanraithow, Lanrayton, Lanrethan, or
    Lanrethon, Hals’s MS. lost, ii. 393. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, rectory, value, patron, incumbent, court, Sergeaux
    family 394. By Editor, Lanreath manor, court 395. Church, Grylls
    family 396. Botelett manor, Treyer manor, Trewen, Treean,
    statistics, rector, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 397
  Lanredock, ii. 379
  Lanreth, i. 316
  ―――― manor, iv. 22, 110
  ―――― parish, ii. 291
  Lansagey, ii. 299
  Lansallas manor, ii. 399, 400
  ―――― parish, ii. 409, 412――iii. 291――iv. 19, 36 _bis_, 38
  LANSALLAS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value in King’s books, patron, incumbent, residents, ii. 398. Manor
    399. By Editor, church, latitude and longitude, manor ibid. Raphel
    manor, Tregavithick, Polvethan, Polperro, its trade and situation,
    statistics, rector 400. Geology by Dr. Boase, copper mine, blue
    slate, Polperro harbour 401
  Lansalwys, ii. 394
  Lansan manor, iii. 456
  Lansdowne, i. 113
  ―――― battle of, ii. 343, 345, 347, 350――iii. 40, 199――iv. 162, 172
  ―――― collection, ii. 426
  ―――― Lord, ii. 98. George Granville Lord, erected a monument to his
    grandfather, Sir Beville Grenville 348
  Lansen, iv. 50
  Lan Stephen, the ancient name of Lanceston, ii. 417
  Lanstoun, by Leland, iv. 256
  Lansulhas, iv. 22
  Lantallan, i. 77
  Lanteagles by Fowey, ii. 36
  Lantegles or Lanteglos, by Camelford parish, i. 1, 3, 304, 322――ii.
    48, 274――iii. 81, 222 _bis_, 291――iv. 20, 42, 44.――Rev. Wm.
    Phillipps, rector, ii. 399
  Lanteglise juxta Fawey, by Leland, iv. 279
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA CAMELFORD parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of rectory, patron, incumbent, in manor
    of Helstone in Trigg, ii. 401, and deanery of Trigg minor, the
    manor, a castle and two parks at Helstone, Camelford town,
    etymology, Arthur slain there, relics dug up, tradition of the
    battle 402. A later battle, Roman coins found, Carew’s etymology,
    insignificance of the borough, had a charter from Richard Earl of
    Cornwall, market and fairs 403. Constitution, revenues and seal of
    the borough, only one street, formerly a chapel 404. By Editor,
    extent of manor ibid. Vestiges of a camp, villages in the parish,
    Fentonwoon, Wallis the circumnavigator, Lord Darlington proprietor
    of the borough, it was close till extinguished in 1832, Lord
    Camelford, Mr. Macpherson 405. His correspondence with Dr. Johnson,
    Mr. Phillipps rector, his monument, Dr. Lombard his predecessor 406.
    Memoir and anecdotes of him 407. Statistics, present rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 408
  Lanteglos juxta Fowey parish, ii. 41, 398――iv. 38, 110, 111, 115, 188
  LANTEGLOS JUXTA FOWEY parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of living, patron, incumbent, manor of Hall,
    Fitz-William family, ii. 409. Description of the seat, Bodenick 410.
    Lamellin manor. By Editor, situation of church, monuments, value,
    tradition of Charles 1st being fired at, Polruan 411. Once a
    corporate town, appropriation of benefice 412. Statistics, and
    Geology by Dr. Boase 413
  Lantenny, i. 40
  Lantiant, by Leland, iv. 277
  Lantine, i. 415――ii. 89
  Lantreghey, iv. 25
  Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, iii. 311
  Lanvorch, ii. 391
  Lanwhitton or Lawhitton manor, iii. 2, 42
  ―――― parish, ii. 95――iii. 40, 43, 335, 338, 456
  LANWHITTON, parish of, Hals deficient. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, origin of the name, value of benefice, patron, manor,
    iii. 1. Farming of, remarkable places, Hexworthy 2. Bullsworthy 3.
    By Editor, church, monuments 3. Lease of the manor, Rev. Mr. Walker,
    statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 4
  Lanwordaby, Thomas, ii. 189
  Lanyhorn castle, iv. 228
  Lanyhorne by Leland, iv. 273
  ―――― creek, iii. 404
  ―――― or Lanihorne manor, iii. 406
  Lanyon, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― cromlech, stone replaced, iii. 32
  ―――― i. 125, 405.――John, ii. 32 _bis_. Built Trelisick house 32.
    Miss 259.――John, iii. 242. John 242, 243 _bis_. John 242 _bis_.
    Richard and William 242. The golden Lanyon 243. Family 242,
    427.――Miss, iv. 101
  ―――― of Lanyon, ii. 142, 143 _ter._ Tobias and arms 142
  ―――― of Madern, ii. 143
  ―――― of Normandy, and arms, ii. 143
  ―――― manor, possessors of, ii. 89
  Laran bridge, ii. 41.――Etymology, iv. 157
  Larmer family, iii. 47
  Larnake, iii. 371
  Larnick, Little, iv. 29. Curiosities found near 33
  Laroche, James, i. 101.――Sir James of Bristol, iii. 193
  Lateran, church of St. John, at Rome, iv. 165
  ―――― council, i. 110 _ter._, 318――ii. 125.――Councils, iv. 165
  Latin church, i. 115.――Its difference from the Greek, ii. 370
  ―――― service for churches, books of, called in, iii. 170 Latitude of
    Falmouth, ii. 23. Of the windmill near Fowey 48. Of Lansallas church 399
  ―――― and longitude of Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376. Of the Land’s
    End 432. Of St. Minver spire and Pentire point 281. Of the Ram head
    375. Of Trevose head 281
  Latur, de, John and Richard, iv. 28
  Laud, Archbishop, iii. 71. His library and palace given to Mr.
    Peters 73
  Launcell’s manor, iii. 353.――House, iv. 18
  ―――― parish, i. 133――iv. 12, 15, 18, 23. Healthiness of, specimens
    of longevity in 18
  ―――― prior of, iv. 13
  Launceston borough, iii. 14――iv. 51.――Burgesses and charter, iii.
    15. Duke of Northumberland’s influence in 460. John Buller, M.P. for
    249. Edward Herle, M.P. for 41. Two Mr. Landews, M.P.s for 42
  ―――― Brygge, iv. 255
  ―――― castle, i. 188――iii. 458
  ―――― church, iii. 45
  ―――― gaol, i. 345
  ―――― honor of, iii. 406
  ―――― manor, iv. 50
  ―――― parish, iii. 1, 2, 180, 335, 338, 457, 458 _bis_, 459, 461――iv.
    50, 51, 52.――Name, iii. 458
  LAUNCESTON or LANCESTON, St. Mary Magdalen parish, Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Dunhevet, ii. 417.
    Its ruins, wells, rivulet, present town scantily supplied with
    water, inhabitants transferred to Launceston, privileges 418.
    Leland’s description, market place, St. Stephen’s church, castle,
    priory, tombs, St. Catherine’s chapel, Carew’s account, two boroughs
    419. Parishes of St. Thomas and St. Stephen, foundation of the town,
    increase of wealth, corporation, fairs, markets, assizes, a
    sanctuary, Castle Terrible, gaol, leather coins, friary and abbey
    420. Tonkin’s description of the castle, held by the Piper family,
    story of Sir Hugh Piper 421. Willis’s history of the borough,
    privileges granted by Richard Earl of Cornwall, assizes appointed by
    Richard 2nd, the property in the Duke of Cornwall 422. Corporation
    of 1620, market changed. By the Editor, magnificent remains of the
    castle, King’s hypothesis of its antiquity 423. Compared with
    Trematon and Tunbridge, the building 424. Etymology, also of
    Launceston, extent and wealth of the priory, wanton devastations of
    the 16th century 425. Destruction of documents, charters of Bishop
    Warlewast and Henry 3rd 426. Revenues of the priory 428. The same
    from the Augmentation office 429. Long the capital of Cornwall, the
    Earl’s residence transferred to Lestwithiel, the sessions to Truro,
    the county gaol and assizes to Bodmin, improvements in the town,
    roads through it 431. Effect of the Reform Bill, view magnificent,
    new iron bridge, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 432
  Launceston priory, iii. 14, 20, 44, 457――iv. 9, 17, 23, 60, 64. No
    remains of, St. Thomas’s church stands on its site 51.――Prior of, i.
    378 _bis_――iii. 457――iv. 15
  ―――― town, i. 77, 108, 163, 201, 283, 359, 381――iii. 358 _bis_, 388,
    417 _bis_, 456 _ter._, 461――iv. 81.――King’s audit at, i. 78.
    Insurgents march to 86.――Church of St. Stephen’s in, iii. 358.
    Friary in 457. Lines on the gate 295.――North gate of, iv. 51.
    Monastery at 11. Finer buildings in than Truro 71. Road from St.
    Columb’s to 46
  Launston, by Leland, iv. 291
  Laurence, Captain John, ii. 33. Built Trelisick house 32.――Rev.
    Thomas, of St. Winnow, iv. 155, 157
  ―――― St. etymology of name and his history, i. 88
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 261
  ―――― St. chapel, i. 88. Duty at 96
  ―――― St. village, i. 89. Court leet and market 90. Fairs 91
  Laurens, Rev. John, iii. 324
  Lavington, Dr. George, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 3, 42. His daughter 42
  Law, Noye’s Grounds, &c. of, iii. 154
  Lawanack parish, i. 21――iv. 68
  Lawanyke, ii. 430
  Lawarran, James, iv. 77
  Lawhitton parish, ii. 417
  Lawrance, St. i. 77
  Lawrence, Humphrey of Launceston, iii. 42
  ―――― St. chapel at Lezant, iii. 42
  ―――― St. village, ii. 385
  Lawry, i. 223――ii. 255.――Miss, iv. 117
  Lawyer, “Noye’s Complete,” iii. 154
  Lax’s tables of latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Lazarus, parable of, iii. 400
  Lea, family changed their name to Kempthorne, iii. 255, 256
  ―――― farm, iii. 255
  Leach, Simon, i. 222.――Nicholas, iii. 358. Mr. executed 184
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408. Sir Simon and arms 408
  Lee, Francis, ii. 375
  Leeds, Francis and Thomas Osborne, Dukes of, i. 127.――Duke of, ii. 218
  Le Feock, ii. 25
  Lefisick manor, iii. 195, 196
  Legard, i. 370
  Legarike, ii. 256
  Legenda aurea, iv. 117
  Legge, Henry; William 4th Earl of Dartmouth, iii. 206
  Le Greice, Sir Robert, governor of St. Mawe’s castle, ii. 277
  Le Grice, his dispute with Cotterell, ii. 277.――Rev. C. V. iii. 58
    _bis_, 97. Family 90, 243
  Leicester, ii. 76
  Leigha, i. 145
  Leland, i. 73, 79, 146, 266 _bis_, 295, 355, 360, 372, 373――ii. 201,
    239, 402, 411, 425――iii. 5, 15, 16 _bis_, 17, 24, 26 _bis_, 277,
    278, 357, 404, 431――iv. 23, 24, 76 _ter._, 102.――His Itinerary, ii.
    2, 281――iii. 402, 404, 444.――Through Cornwall extracted, Appendix
    VII. iv. 256 to 292.――His inscription on the walls of St. Mawe’s
    castle, ii. 281. Account of Launceston 418.――His Collectanea, iii.
    332 _bis_, 385――iv. 117. Has well described the town of Truro 76, 78
    _bis_, 80. The description 76
  Lelant parish, i. 355, 364――ii. 119, 257 _bis_, 258 _ter._, 260,
    265, 270, 271, 272 _bis_, 284――iii. 46, 339, 384――iv. 52, 53 _ter._,
    58.――Valley in, iii. 59
  LELANT parish, Hals, lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, value of benefice, patronage, rectory, saint. By Editor,
    situation of church, overwhelmed with sand, iii. 5. Mr. Davies
    subscribed towards its erection, several inundations of sand,
    checked by planting rushes, town buried, name, division, Treadreath
    6. Villages, value of benefice, glebe, vicarage house buried, no
    resident clergyman, new house building, appropriation of tithes, St.
    Uny buried here, parish feast, Trembetha 7. Families of Praed,
    Hoskin, and Pawley, the last of the Pawleys, a great heiress, died
    in the workhouse, Praed estate inherited by the Mackworths 8.
    Character of Mr. H. Mackworth Praed 9; and of his son William. The
    Grand Junction canal, its utility, chalk ridges crossing England 10.
    Death of Mr. W. Praed, situation of Trevethow, Trencroben-hill,
    house improved by Mr. H. M. Praed, fine plantations 11. Statistics
    and Geology by Dr. Boase 12. Whele Reath 13
  Lelizike in Probus, iii. 423
  Lemain hamlet, iv. 25. Or Lammana seems to have been of importance 36
  Lemon, i. 58 _bis_. Caroline and Sir William 423.――Harriet, ii. 250.
    Col. John 85. William, his life 81. Saved several lives, was a tin
    smelter 82. Established a mine at Whele Fortune, his marriage 83.
    Made £10,000 by his mine, removed to Truro, principal merchant in
    Cornwall, a classical scholar, sheriff, magistrate, and M.P.,
    received a piece of plate from Frederick, Prince of Wales, called
    the great Mr. Lemon 84. His family, anecdotes of him 85. William,
    jun., 85 _bis_. Sir William 85, 100, 250. Mr. 33 _bis_, 134, 214,
    219.――John, iv. 33. Mr. 89 _bis_. Made a fortune at Truro, began his
    career at Penzance, chosen as partner by Mr. Coster of Truro 89
  ―――― of Carclew, Anna, iii. 230. Anne 249. Sir Charles, improved
    Carclew 230. Caroline, Harriet, and Jane 230. Colonel John, memoir
    of 229. A proficient in music 230. William 229. William, jun. 159.
    Sir William, memoir of 229. Improved Carclew, was a proficient in
    music 230. Sir William 249. Mr. 47. Mr. and Mrs. 229. The great Mr.
    Lemon the younger 159. Family 113
  Lennan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Lennard, i. 266
  Lentegles by Camelford, ii. 372
  Lentyon, ii. 91
  Leo, Pope, ii. 110 _ter._
  Leofric, the first Bishop of Exeter, ii. 69. Chaplain to Edward the
    Confessor 61 _bis_.――The last Bishop of Crediton, iii. 416
  Leofrick, dedicated a church to St. Walburg, iv. 125
  Leon, city of, iii. 285
  Leonard, St. lepers of, at Launceston, ii. 422
  Leonitus leonurus, iv. 182
  Leopards changed to lions, iv. 71
  Lepers, hospital for, i. 89. Laws relating to 90
  Lepomani, Aloysi, Bishop of Seville, i. 82
  Leprosy, its prevalence in England, i. 89
  Lerchdeacon, heir of, iii. 437
  Lerneth, i. 264
  Leryn barton, iv. 29 _bis_
  ―――― creek, iv. 30 _bis_
  Lescaddock castle, iii. 82
  Lescar’s castle, iv. 228
  Lescard, ii. 430
  Leschell, iii. 110
  Lescor, heir of, iii. 140
  Le Seur’s Histoire de l’Eglise et de l’Empire, iv. 117
  Leskeard castle, iii. 169
  ―――― church, i. 33
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 14
  ―――― parish, i. 195――ii. 291 _bis_, 388――iii. 167, 245, 260, 347,
    348 _bis_, 360
  LESKEARD parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, iii. 13. Patronage, value of benefice, appropriation of
    tithes, manor, town, privileges granted 14. Royalty in the duchy,
    charter 15. Elective franchise, great market, ancient castle 16.
    Conduit, extent of the town, a coinage town, defeat of the rebel
    army, market day, town hall, clock erected by Mr. Dolben,
    corporation plate 17. By Editor, trade and market, villas around,
    ib. Improvement of roads and canal, distinguished persons resident
    there, families of Jane and Taunton, Mr. Haydon, Dr. Cardew 18.
    Longitude determined by Mr. Haydon, Mr. Trehawke, his eccentric
    character, left his property to Mr. Kekewich, nunnery of Poor
    Clares, castle, schoolhouse, church 19. Towers taken down,
    appropriation of tithes, patron, monuments in church, memorials of
    Charles 1st, chief proprietors, Editor’s manor of Lamellin, borough,
    Reform Act, etymology 20. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    quarries. By Editor, fancied gold ore 21
  Leskeard prison, iii. 246
  ―――― town, iii. 173, 187, 246, 248. A coinage town, ii. 301――iv.
    186, 188.――Account of, iii. 14. Canal from East Looe to 120, 252.
    Road from Looe to 253. From Tor Point 439.――Roman causeway between
    Looe and, iv. 30. Charles first advanced to 185. Parliamentary
    officers brought prisoners to, King’s army marched out of 186
  Leskeret church, ii. 428
  Lesnewith hundred, i. 1, 60, 197, 304, 322――ii. 48, 86, 273, 401,
    402――iii. 22 _bis_, 222, 232, 274, 276, 352――iv. 61 _bis_, 66 _bis_,
    124, 125, 376
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 22, 23
  ―――― parish, i. 304――ii. 273 _bis_――iii. 232, 236
  LESNEWITH parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, hundred divided, value of benefice, incumbent, Trevygham.
    By Editor, Trewonell, iii. 22. Grylls manor, advowson, principal
    proprietor, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 23
  Lestormel castle, iii. 25
  L’Estrange’s Life of Charles 1st, iii. 145
  Lestwithiel parish, iv. 6, 29 _bis_, 30 _bis_, 109, 158
  LESTWITHIEL parish, Hals lost. Situation, boundaries, etymology,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbents, borough, name of the river,
    iii. 24. Ruins of the castle, Trinity chapel, old buildings used
    for the stannary court, Camden’s description, county town, prison
    25. Edmund Earl of Cornwall had his palace here, privileges
    conferred by Earl Richard, antiquity of its franchise, revenues of
    the corporation, damage done by the parliament army 26. The lords
    of the manor 27. Rent payable to the Duke, lies between hills,
    river navigable. By the Editor, locality, its beauty, seat of the
    duchy court, indebted to Richard King of the Romans, palace
    converted into a prison, charter of George 2nd 28. Its invalidity,
    church, town extends beyond the parish, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 29
  Lestwithiel town, ii. 391, 392, 393――iv. 186.――A coinage town, ii.
    301. The residence of the Earl of Cornwall and called the county
    town 431. Mr. Vincent, M.P. for 227. Palace at 392.――Duchy exchequer
    at, iv. 99. Essex marched to 185. Encamped near 185, 186. The King
    did the same 186. Essex was surrounded near 187
  Letcot mine, ii. 378
  Lethbridge family, ii. 397.――Rev. C. H. iii. 461.――Rev. C. of Stoke
    Climsland, iv. 12. Rev. C. of St. Thomas 52
  ―――― of Madford, Christopher, ii. 377
  Letters to and from Mr. Moyle, ii. 76.――Various, to learned persons,
    by Farnaby, iv. 87
  Leucan, St. parish, ii. 283
  Levalra, i. 421
  Levan, St. parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 89, 290, 427, 428, 431
  LEVAN, ST. parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, saint, daughter church to St. Burian, iii. 30. By Editor, fine
    scenery, Trereen Dinas, the Loging Rock, natural ibid. Dr. Borlase’s
    account of it, stone removed by Lieut. Goldsmith 31. Sensation
    excited, Editor’s communication with government successful,
    subscription raised by him, replacing of the rock; Lanyon Cromlech
    also replaced, walk from Trereen Dinas to the church, Porth Kernow,
    church, St. Levina 32. Her relics, monument in the church, history
    of Miss Dennis 33. Her poetry, and Sophia St. Clare, a novel 34.
    Tol-Peder-Penwith, singular cavern under it, danger of two visitors,
    disinterestedness of a neighbouring farmer; Bosistow village,
    smallness of poor rate, and its cause 35. Parish feast, statistics;
    Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting construction and romantic
    appearance of the rocks, Logan Rock at Trereen and Tunnel Rock at
    Tol-Peder-Penwith. Editor’s explanation of the name Loging Rock 36
  Leveale, i. 142, 143. Lewis 142. Arms 143
  Leveddon family, ii. 399
  Levela family, iii. 216
  Levignus, Bishop of Kirton, i. 60
  Levina or Levine, St. iii. 30. Her history 32. Relics 33
  Levine Prisklo, by Leland, iv. 271
  Lewannack parish, ii. 226――iii. 40, 335
  LEWANNICK parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    value of benefice, patronage, a poor parish, manor of Trelask, its
    etymology, Lower family, iii. 37. By Editor, gothic ornaments of the
    church and monuments ibid. Villages, manor of Trelaske and its
    possessors, Tinney Hall manor, etymology of Trelaske 38. Pollyfont
    manor, chapel, impropriation, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 39
  Lewellen in Gwythian, ii. 141
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Minver, iii. 237
  Lewis 14th, King of France, ii. 112, 407. Mr. Killigrew’s repartee
    to 14. His generosity to the English driven on his coast 322
  Ley, i. 10. Hugh 10.――Rev. Samuel, ii. 356.――Rev. Hugh, of Redruth,
    iii. 380.――Rev. T. H. of Rame 379
  ―――― of Ponacumb family, iii. 226
  ―――― of Treworga Vean, Andrew, and arms, i. 396
  Leyden University, iii. 72. In Holland 188
  Lezant parish, ii. 226――iii. 1, 43, 335, 338――iv. 6, 7
  LEZANT parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, dedication, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    Trecarell, Landew, family of Trefusis, iii. 40. Of Herle 41. By
    Editor, hundred, Trecarrel ibid. Ancient hall and chapel at, Landew,
    Mr. Northmore Herle, chapel at Landew, and a third within the
    parish, Carthamartha, church 42. Monuments, statistics, rector,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 43
  Lhuyd, Mr. i. 220.――His Archæologia, iii. 386
  Lhwyd, iv. 8
  Lichfield, St. Chad patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― and Coventry, Bishop of, William Lloyd, iii. 299. William Smith 141
  Lidain, mother of St. Perran, iii. 331
  Lidford borough, i. 170.――Versesm on, iii. 184
  ―――― castle, Devon, iii. 184 _bis_, 185
  ―――― law, iii. 184
  ―――― prisoners, iii. 184
  ―――― town, iii. 185
  Lidgate, John, i. 338
  Lidley, i. 412
  Lifton, Devon, ii. 122, 123
  Lighthouse, on St. Agnes island, ii. 358
  Lighthouses on Lizard Point, account of, ii. 358
  ―――― a triangle of in Guernsey, ii. 358
  Lightning, damage done to a church by, i. 216, 217.――Superstition
    connected with, iii. 48.――Warleggon church suffered from, iv. 130.
    And St. Wenn’s tower 138. Neglect of precautions against, and many
    church towers in Cornwall struck by 130
  Lightstone hundred, i. 369
  Ligusticum Cornubiense, iv. 178
  Lillo, author of George Barnewell, ii. 102, 104
  Lilly, William, i. 84 _bis_
  Limerick diocese, iii. 434
  Limestone burnt for manure, and extremely valuable, ii. 362
  Limmet, Nicholas, ii. 196
  Lincoln, i. 414, 415
  ―――― William Smith, Bishop of, iii. 141
  ―――― Clinton, Earl of, iii. 216
  Lincoln’s Inn, iii. 143, 152, 154
  Lincolnshire, chalk hills in, iii. 10
  Line, Samuel, i. 418
  Linkinhorne parish, iii. 40, 167――iv. 7, 9
  LINKINHORNE parish, Hals lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, iii. 43. Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, manor of
    Carnadon Prior, the rocky hill 44. By the Editor, manors of Millaton
    and Carnadon Prior, Carraton downs, highest hill but one in
    Cornwall, royalist army there, manor of Trefrize, ib. Many elevated
    points and their prospects, Sharpy Tor, Cheesewring, the Hurlers,
    described in Bond’s sketches of East and West Looe, church rebuilt,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 45
  Linkynhorne, ii. 229
  Linnæus, ii. 331――iii. 49 _bis_
  Linnus, i. 197 _bis_
  Lionesse country, iii. 430. Its destruction 309. Editor’s opinion,
    attempt to restore it by an incantation 310
  Lisart, ii. 116
  Lisbon, iii. 423.――Fortune made at 17.――Packet boats receive
    despatches for, at Falmouth, ii. 11. Regular communication with
    Falmouth 18
  Liskard, by Leland, iv. 280
  Liske, Paganus de, i. 383
  Liskeard, i. 174, 177, 318, 411――ii. 76, 154
  Lisle, Alice de, iii. 92. Family 90.――Sir John, one of the original
    Knights of the Garter and his arms, ii. 137
  ―――― Thomas, Viscount, ii. 108
  Lismanock, ii. 203, 211
  List of the Dukes of Cornwall from the time of Edward 3rd, iv. 373
  Lister Killigrew, Mr. iii. 417 _ter._
  ―――― Martin, of Liston, Staffordshire, ii. 6
  Litchfield, Earl of, his letter, iii. 50
  Lithony, i. 420
  Lithospernum erubescens, iv. 182
  Littlecot, iii. 82
  Littleton, Miss, iv. 161
  ―――― of Lanhidrock, William, and arms, iii. 227
  Livesay of Livesay, i. 302. Mary 302
  Livings, five held by one clergyman, iii. 451. Accounted for by Mr.
    Whitaker 452
  Livingus, Abbot of Tavistock, and Bishop of Crediton, nephew of
    Burwoldus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Lizard or Lizart district, iii. 110, 126, 127, 180, 311, 418, 420,
    421. Etymology 422. Geology 424
  ―――― manor, ii. 126, 358
  ―――― peninsula, ii. 359
  ―――― point, ii. 106, 172, 247, 358 _bis_――iii. 423, 445. Anciently
    called the Ocrinum promontory, i. 20. Geological interest of 330,
    331. Lighthouses on 358. Description of them, latitude and
    longitude 359.――Name, iii. 375. Rocks at 283. High water at 98
  Lizard town, ii. 358
  Llan, Welch, i. 192
  Llan Badern Vaur, iii. 336
  Llewellin, Martin, his epitaph on Sir Beville Grenville, ii. 348
  Lloyd, William, Bishop of St. Asaph, Lichfield and Coventry, and
    Worcester, iii. 299
  Lluyd, ii. 173
  Llwyd, Edward, ii. 122
  Llwyn, Welch, i. 192
  Lo Poole, by Leland, iv. 268
  Lobelia crinus, iv. 182
  Lock, i. 211
  Lockyer of Roach, iii. 82
  Lodeneck, iii. 277
  Loe Bar near Helston, i. 136
  Loffyngeo, ii. 430
  Logan, Logging, or Loging Rock, i. 148――iii. 30, 36, 89――iv.
    164.――Name, iii. 36. Description and history of 31
  Loire, i. 107
  Lombard, Daniel, D.D. ii. 406. Vicar of Lanteglos 401. His history,
    had his living from George 2nd, was member of a German club with
    some of the royal family, visited Mr. Gregor, had no other
    acquaintance in Cornwall, a profound scholar, some anecdotes of him
    407. His death, he left a valuable library to his successors 408
  London, i. 242, 341, 356, 404――ii. 28, 30, 47, 98, 101 _bis_, 177,
    192, 213, 227 _bis_, 266, 267, 407 _bis_――iii. 85, 96, 142, 188,
    189, 264, 288, 316, 450――iv. 86.――Bath free stone brought to, i. 58.
    Rebels approach 87.――Two brothers from Bodmin went to seek their
    fortunes at, ii. 34. The owners of the Virginia fleet in 42. King
    Richard after his imprisonment returned to 179. St. Mellitus, Bishop
    of, its two cathedrals founded by him 288.――Hospital of the Knights
    of St. John in, iii. 78. Society for purchasing advowsons in 399.
    Mr. Peters arrives, as commissioner of grievances from America in
    73. Richard Chiverton Lord Mayor of 162.――Sir John Collet and Sir
    John Percivall Lord Mayors of, iv. 134. Thomas Bradbury, Hugh
    Clopton, Stephen Jennings and John Percivall, sheriffs of 134
  London architecture reaching to Cornwall, iv. 81
  ―――― Bishop of, iii. 73. Mellitus the first Bishop 167
  ―――― bridge, partly built of Cornish stone, iii. 63. High tide at
    98. Time occupied in flowing to it round the southern coast 99
  ―――― coffers, iii. 248
  ―――― Gazette, iii. 143
  ―――― newspapers received daily at Penzance, i. 59
  ―――― port of, iii. 450
  ―――― road, to Falmouth, ii. 104, 355. To Land’s End 317. Through St.
    Bennet’s valley 387. Through Launceston 431
  ―――― stools and tables, iii. 248
  ―――― tower of, ii. 170
  ―――― wall, iii. 298
  Londonderry, Thomas Pitt Earl of, and Ridgeway Earl of, i. 69
  Long, Thomas, iii. 38
  ―――― of Penheale, J. S. i. 379, 380. Margaret 380. Thomas 378, 379.
    Arms 378.――Thomas, ii. 398, 399 _bis_;――or Penhele family, iv. 45
  Longbound, Thomas, i. 373 _ter._, 374
  Longbridge, ii. 120, 176
  Longchamp, William, Bishop of Ely, Regent for Richard 1st, his
    misgovernment, deposed, ii. 177. His escape 178
  Longer of Tregonnebris, Mr. anecdote of, iii. 427
  Longeville, Mr. ii. 120
  Longinus, by the Rev. J. Toup, ii. 266
  Longitude of Pendennis castle, ii. 23. Of the wind-mill near Fowey
    48. Of Landsallas church 399
  ―――― board of, published Meyer’s tables, ii. 222
  Longitudes, derived at sea from the moon’s place, ii. 222
  Longman and Co. iii. 96
  Longporth, now London, i. 338
  Longships, iii. 432
  Longstone downs, ii. 271
  Longunnet barton, iv. 29
  Lonsallos, i. 264
  Loo bar, ii. 129
  ―――― river, i. 179 _bis_, 318, 320――ii. 291.――Source of, i. 184
  Looe bar, iii. 447
  ―――― borough, iii. 119.――Account of 119
  ―――― bridge, iv. 30
  ―――― church, iii. 378
  ―――― cove, iii. 129
  ―――― harbour, iv. 19
  ―――― haven, iii. 118, 119
  ―――― island, iv. 25, 28
  ―――― parish, ii. 85, 400
  ―――― pool, ii. 126, 155, 158――iii. 126, 441. Description of 443.
    Sand bank across 443, 444. Account of the trout in 442, 443
  ―――― river, iii. 119, 121, 128, 245, 252, 291――iv. 23.――Royalty of,
    iii. 442
  ―――― town, i. 379――iv. 29, 30 _ter._, 36, 124.――Marble rock near, i.
    187.――Canal to Leskeard from, iii. 18. Road to 439 _bis_. From
    Leskeard 253.――Trade of, iv. 36
  ―――― East, borough, by Hals, etymology, commerce, chapel, manor,
    charter, members of parliament, jurisdiction, iii. 119. Market,
    fairs, arms, writ 119. Tonkin 120. Editor, Bond’s topographical
    sketches, disfranchisement, canal, projected road over Dartmoor
    ibid. Situation, built on a beach, Mr. Bond 121. John Buller, M.P.
    for 249
  ―――― East, town, iii. 119――iv. 20, 21. A celt found at 33. Bridge
    from West Looe to 20
  ―――― East and West, iii. 229, 246.――Boroughs, iv. 29.――Bond’s
    history of, iii. 246, 378.――Surrounded by water, iv. 35
  ―――― West, borough, corporation, and history, iv. 28. Constitution
    20, 28. Writ 20. Seal and arms 21. Inferior to East Looe 20. Mayor
    and burgesses 34. Poor 35. Admiral Sir Charles Wager, M.P. for
    38.――John Rogers, M.P. for, iii. 445
  ―――― West, down, iv. 29 _bis_, 31, 32, 33. Its inclosure desirable
    34. Part of, let 35. Thunderbolt found in 32
  ―――― West, town, i. 84――iii. 119, 300――iv. 25; or Portuan,
    etymology, bridge to East Looe 28
  Loow, Est and West, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lords Spiritual, their precedency disputed, denied by parliament,
    ii. 181
  Lorraine, St. Dye’s church in, ii. 131
  Lostwhythyel, by Leland, iv. 290
  Lostwithiel, i. 78, 127.――ii. 38, 41 _ter._, 422.――By Leland, iv. 277
  Louer, West, or Consort Hundred, i. 38
  Louis, i. 247 _bis_.――Family, iii. 64 _bis_
  Louisberg harbour, iii. 218
  Love of Penzance, Mr. iii. 84
  Lovell, John, i. 246
  Lovice, William, William, Leonard, iv. 41
  Low Countries, iv. 86
  Lowbrygge, iv. 255
  Lower, Dr. Richard, Thomas, i. 257.――Sir Nicholas, ii. 372 _bis_,
    373 _sex._, 374, 376. Lady 373. Major 375. Family 372, 373, 397.
    Distinguished 376.――Humphrey, iii. 358. Thomas 38. Family 37, 38,
    223. Monuments to 225.――Dr., Physician to Charles II. and his three
    daughters, iv. 94
  ―――― of Trelaske, in Lawanack, Sir Nicholas, his marriage and dau.
    William, and William, iv. 156
  ―――― of Tremeer, Richard, M. D. his works, iv. 98. Sir William, his
    works 97. His death 98
  ―――― of St. Wenow, or Winnow, Sir Nicholas, iii. 200. Heir 201.
    Family 133.――Mr. iv. 94
  ―――― Town, of Lambrigan, iii. 315
  Lowlands, iii. 240
  Lowlog river, source of, iv. 237
  “Lucan’s Pharsalia,” notes on, iv. 87
  Lucas, Elizabeth, i. 222
  ―――― of Warwickshire, Mary, iii. 147
  Lucca, iv. 126
  Lucian, ii. 76
  Lucies manor, account of, ii. 358
  Lucius, i. 335 _ter._
  Lucy family, iv. 121; or Lacan, Richard 77, 81 _quat._, 82 _bis_,
    83, 84 _bis_
  ―――― of Charlecote, George, bought the manor of Fowey, M.P. for it,
    ii. 46
  Lud, King, ii. 50
  Luddra, Robert, iii. 253
  Ludduham, now Lugian-lese manor, ii. 257. Account of 258
  Ludewin, or Ludevaulles, by Leland, iv. 265
  LUDGEAN, LUDGVAN, or LUDGVEN, parish, Hals lost. Situation,
    boundaries, name, value of benefice, patron, manor of Ludgian
    lease, iii. 46. By Editor, extent and consequence of the manor
    ibid. Treassow, Castle-an-Dinas, very lofty, produces china-clay,
    entrenchment, Rosevithney, Trowell, the mine of Whele Fortune,
    well resorted to for restoring sight 47. Collurian farm, Varfull,
    belonging to the Davy family, notice of Sir Humphrey Davy, the
    church, rectory house, church tower, a pinnacle thrown down by
    lightning, imputed to a perturbed spirit, a legend of St. Ludgvan,
    and a stream of miraculous water 48. Dr. William Borlase, rector,
    his learning and works, diploma from Oxford 49. Earl of
    Litchfield’s letter upon it, extract from the university official
    register 50. Memoir of Dr. Borlase from the Biographical
    Dictionary 51. List of his works 52. His death, correspondence
    with pope, communications to the royal society, pupils, tomb,
    inscription illegible, Editor’s reflections on him in Greek, his
    two sons 53. Two rectors since, present incumbent, chief
    proprietors of land, parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 54. Ludgvan stone, marshes 55
  Ludgian, ii. 260
  ―――― or Ludgvan Lease manor, iii. 123. Account of 46 _bis_
  Ludgvan parish, i. 355――ii. 118 _bis_, 121 _bis_, 169――iii. 5,
    343――iv. 52, 53 _bis_, 54.――Rev. John Stephens, rector of, ii.
    270.――Rev. H. Praed, iii. 9, 54
  ―――― St. a stream endowed with miraculous powers by, iii. 48
  ―――― stone, iii. 55
  Ludlow of London, i. 255. Elizabeth 259
  Luffe, ii. 427
  Lugacius, Bishop, iii. 331
  Lugad, Bishop, iii. 331
  Luggan, Mr. ii. 252
  Luggyan Lese manor, ii. 258
  Luke, Robert, iii. 83. Dr. Stephen 96, 337 _bis_
  ―――― of Trevilles, William, and family, iii. 406
  ―――― St. ii. 240. His day 117, 276
  Lukey, Mr. i. 271
  Lunar tables, ii. 223
  Lundy island, i. 188.――View of, ii. 49
  Lupton, in Brixham parish, Devon, iv. 156
  Lupus, Bishop of Troyes, ii. 64
  ―――― St. ii. 73, 74
  ―――― Hugh, Earl of Chester, iv. 125
  Lure, i. 221
  Lurginus, Bishop of Kirton, iv. 62
  Lusus naturæ, supposed, ii. 297
  Luther, Martin, i. 312
  Lutterell, i. 247
  ―――― of Polsew, i. 393
  Luttrell, i. 400, 402.――Sir Andrew, iii. 103
  ―――― of Dunster castle, Andrew and his daughter, iii. 342
  Luxemberg, John of, King of Bohemia, iv. 72
  Luxilian church, iv. 100
  ―――― parish, ii. 93, 155, 384, 390; or Luxillian, iii. 391, 395
  LUXILIAN or LUXULIAN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. Situation, boundaries,
    name, change of saint, iii. 55. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, manor of Prideaux, etymology, Prideaux castle, and family
    56. By Editor, chief landowners, Rashleigh family, situation of
    church, taste of Mr. Grylls the present vicar, beauty of church and
    tower, room in the tower, archives preserved there in the civil
    wars, vale leading to St. Blazey bridge, Tonkin’s Geology, “Lyell’s
    Principles of Geology,” parish, statistics 57. Geology by Dr. Boase,
    stream-works, quality of the tin, subterranean trees and plants 58.
    By Editor, unsightliness of Cornish valleys, Mr. H. M. Praed
    restored a valley in Lelant to beauty 59
  Luxmoore, Rev. Coryndon, ii. 408
  Luxton, John, i. 399
  Luxulion, i. 52
  Lyda, or Lides, St. island, iv. 230, 266
  Lydcott, iii. 252
  Lyddra, Robert, iii. 257
  Lydford Brygge, iv. 255
  Lyell, Charles, on Geology, iii. 57
  Lyle, John, rang the bells on the accession of George III. George
    IV. and William IV. iv. 18
  Lynar, or Lyner river, iii. 119, 437, 438
  Lyne, Rev. Charles, of Roach, iii. 401. Rev. Richard, of Little
    Petherick 335. Rev. Dr. of Mevagissey, his singularities 194. Mr.
    made a fortune at Lisbon 17. His grandfather 19
  Lynkinhorne, ii. 430
  Lyonness, i. 198
  Lyskerde, ii. 430
  Lysons, i. 135, 146, 356, 369, 399, 402――ii. 86, 87, 91, 100, 147,
    149 _bis_, 153, 217, 229, 231, 232, 252, 256, 281, 294, 330, 348,
    358, 362, 363 _bis_, 383, 388, 395, 397 _bis_, 400, 404, 412,
    415――iii. 7 _bis_, 19, 20, 38, 46, 77, 90, 117 _bis_, 126 _bis_, 138
    _bis_, 150, 172, 192, 223 _bis_, 232, 234, 239, 240, 248, 255 _bis_,
    258, 261, 274, 276 _bis_, 288, 289, 295, 309 _bis_, 332, 334, 335,
    342, 346 _bis_, 350 _bis_, 352, 372 _bis_, 373, 398, 399 _bis_, 405,
    406, 419, 424, 427, 439 _bis_, 445, 458――iv. 3, 4, 9 _bis_, 16
    _bis_, 26, 41, 44, 51, 60, 62, 64, 65, 67, 97, 107, 114, 121, 127,
    130, 136, 141.――His Cornwall, i. 228, 266 _bis_, 315 _bis_, 340――ii.
    343――iii. 80――iv. 141, 163.――His Magna Brit. ii. 47――iv. 26.――His
    account of the repulse of the French from Fowey, ii. 46. His
    descents, &c. of manors 47
  Lythe, John Robert, iii. 387
  Lyttelton, Christiana, and George, Lord, i. 69
  Lyttleton family, ii. 383

  Mabe hill, iii. 63
  ―――― parish, i. 137, 236, 416――ii. 92, 94, 104――iii. 64――iv. 2
  MABE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name, iii.
    59. Ancient jurisdiction, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    amount of land tax, Tremough, Tremayne 60. By Tonkin, name, Carnsew,
    and family, removed to Trewoon, Carverth 61. Tremogh, large house
    built, Hantertavas 62. By Editor, Hals’s mistaken etymology of
    Tremogh, Tremogh sold 62. Trees cut down, granite quarries, road
    turned, rare plant, origin of the Tremayne family, statistics 63.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 64
  MABEN, or Mabin, St. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient state, value of benefice, patron, iii. 64. Incumbent, land
    tax, St. Mabiana, Collquite, Treblithike, Haligan 65. Penwyne 66.
    Tonkin, nothing new. By Editor, Tredeathy, church monuments 66. Mr.
    Peters, his controversy with Warburton, his ancestry, and life 67.
    Traits of character, extracts from his meditations 68. Opinions on
    the Book of Job 69. Remarks on Hugh Peters, his history 71.
    Settlement in America, a popular preacher, deputed to England 72.
    Entered the parliament service, obtained Lambeth palace and Laud’s
    library, his death 73. Parish statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 74
  Mabiana, St. iii. 65
  Mabilia, a countess, monument to, ii. 419
  Mabin, i. 2
  Mabyn, St. church, iv. 135
  ―――― St. parish, i. 84, 367, 371, 375――ii. 150 _bis_, 332――iv. 93, 95
  Macarmicke, Colonel, i. 208
  Macclesfield, Fitton Gerard, Earl of, i. 67.――Lord, iii. 378 _bis_
  Macculloch, Dr. ii. 115
  M Gregor, i. 13
  Machinery, curious piece of, i. 55
  Mackworth, Mr. singular story of, and family, iii. 9
  Macpherson, the producer of Ossian, ii. 405. His quarrel with
    Johnson 406
  Madan, a British king, iii. 79
  Madaran, or Maddern parish, ii. 118, 122, 174
  Madarne church, i. 296
  ―――― parish, iv. 164 _bis_
  Maddarns, St. or Maddern well, account of, iii. 91. Extraordinary
    cure from 79
  Maddern, John and William, iii. 83
  ―――― parish, iii. 46, 242 _bis_, 243, 283, 289, 425 _bis_
  MADDERN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient state, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, saint, unknown, iii. 78.
    St. Maddarn’s well, a cripple cured by it, Alverton 79. Mayne
    Screffes, inscription on the stone, Landithy 80. Penzance, town
    burnt by the Spaniards, charter, taken and pillaged by the
    parliament army 81. Rich booty, a coinage town, principal
    inhabitants, arms, writ, Lescaddock castle 82. By Tonkin, a
    vicarage, patron, incumbent ibid. Penzance, a separate parish, but
    daughter-church, incorporated, corporation in 1620. By the Editor,
    situation of the church, its connection with the Templars,
    monuments, mild air of the Mount’s Bay, Castle Horneck 83. Dr.
    Walter Borlase, memoir of him, built the house at Castle Horneck,
    Trereife, memoir of Dr. Frank Nicholls 84. Trengwainton used as a
    farm-house, Sir Rose Price, the present owner, has made it a
    splendid residence, origin of the Price family 85. History of Mr.
    Vinicombe 87. His picture, Rosecadgwell, Nanceolvern, Poltare,
    Trenear, notice of Captain H. P. Tremenheere 88. Rose hill,
    Lariggan, Mr. Pope and the Vatican, Lanyon, a cromleigh 89.
    Cromleigh at Malfra, and others in the parishes of Morva and
    Zennor, conjectures respecting them, description, etymology,
    Landithy, impropriation of tithes, patronage of the vicarage,
    Alverton 90. Its magnificence lost, Maddern well, its copiousness,
    Penzance flourishing, its gradual rise 91. Market house, a coinage
    town, adverse events of the civil war, pier, character of the
    corporation 92. Chapel of ease, endowed by Mr. Tremenheere, new
    church, exertions of Mr. Vibert, Mr. Edward Giddy, and the
    Tremenheere family, for the benefit of the town 93. New market
    house, distinguished families of the place, the Tonkins, Sir
    Humphrey Davy, introduced by the Editor to Dr. Beddoes 94. His
    Life by Dr. Paris, Dr. Batten, Mr. Carne, Dr. Boase 95. Mr. Thomas
    Giddy, Dr. Luke, Admiral Pellew, a grammar-school, Editor there
    under Dr. Parkins 96. Mr. Morris, the present master, Penzance
    much resorted to by invalids, Mr. E. Giddy’s observation on the
    climate, Dr. Paris’s medical account of it, Algerine corsair
    wrecked there 97. Inhabitants alarmed, afterwards visited the
    strangers, they were sent home in a man-of-war, latitude and
    longitude of Penzance church, establishment of the port, and at
    various other places 98. Parish statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase,
    the Wherry mine 99. Sand bank and submarine forest, parish covered
    with metallic veins, account of the Cornwall Geological Society at
    Penzance 100
  Madders parish, ii. 284
  Madford near Launceston, iii. 337
  Madras, Fort St. George, and government house at, iv. 11
  Madron parish, iii. 245
  Maen Tol, i. 141
  Magdalen Ball in Gluvias, iv. 3
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 87
  ―――― hall, Oxford, Mr. Lake entered of, ii. 389
  Mahomet’s character of Thomas Paleolagus, ii. 368
  Mahometans, ii. 37
  Mahon, Sir Reginald, ii. 376. Family 339, 353, 354, 396. Property
    353, 376.――Family, iii. 8. Property 207
  Mahun family, iv. 54
  Maids, the nine, iv. 2
  Maidstone frigate, iii. 186.――Commanded by Captain Penrose, ii. 25.
    Sailed to the Sound 27
  Mail coaches established, i. 57
  Maine and Loire, department of, in France, iv. 105
  Maiowe, Philip, iii. 123
  Majendie, Ashurst, instituted the Geological Society of Cornwall,
    iii. 100. His Geology of the Lizard 424
  Major, Peter, of Foye, ii. 110. Mr. 43. Mr. a tobacco merchant 43
  Maker parish, ii. 250, 251――iii. 374
  MAKER parish, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, ancient state,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, Mount Edgecumbe, history of
    the Edgecumbe family, Sir Richard an adherent of Henry 7th, iii.
    101. Obliged to abscond, concealed himself in a cave, and deceived
    his pursuers by throwing his cap into the sea, rewarded by Henry
    with the lands of Bodrigan 102. Built a chapel in commemoration of
    his escape, he or his father founded a Benedictine priory, family
    have spent their fortune in service of the crown 103. Carew’s
    description of Mount Edgecumbe, part of it and of Millbrook in
    Devon 104. Millbrook once possessed of the elective franchise,
    inhabitants in Elizabeth’s time addicted themselves to piracy,
    Cremble passage, its danger 105. Tonkin does not notice this
    parish. By Editor, beautiful situation, church ibid. Signals from
    it, observations on signals, value of the benefice 106. Inceworth,
    Millbrook formerly an important town, government naval brewhouses
    removed, advantage of the new buildings, Vaultershome, or West
    Stonehouse, now Mount Edgecumbe, its beauty 107. Kingston and
    Cawsand, Plymouth harbour, divisions of, the Breakwater or
    artificial reef, description of 108. Comparison of its bulk,
    weight, and labour with the great Pyramid of Egypt, parish
    statistics, population fluctuates with war or peace, vicar 109.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 110
  Makertone manor, ii. 251
  Malachi, the Hebrew prophet, ii. 224
  Malachy, St. Archbishop of Armagh, ii. 225
  Malaga, i. 161
  Malivery, Helvethus, iv. 41
  Mallett, i. 262
  Malmsbury, iv. 155
  ―――― William of, iii. 385――iv. 96.――His chronicle, i. 407
  Malo, St. iii. 257. His day 258
  Malo’s, St. ii. 123
  Malta island, i. 411
  ―――― knights of, i. 411 _bis_
  Mama Tidy, a name of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Man, Isle of, i. 339. King of 339
  Manaccan parish, i. 417――iii. 124, 127, 128, 138
  MANACCAN parish, situation, boundaries, name modern, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iii. 110. Once
    called Minster, alien monasteries, etymology, Kestell 111. By
    Tonkin, name. By Editor, etymology, church pleasantly situated, town
    neat, vicarage house good, Mr. Polwhele 112. Helford, passage at,
    Kestell, Halvose, statistics, parish feast, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, titanium found in the streams 113
  Manackan, i. 38
  Manacles point, ii. 331
  Manaton, account of by Hals, ii. 230. By Tonkin ibid. By Whitaker
    and Lysons 231
  ―――― of Manaton family, ii. 230. Francis 230 _bis_. Henry 230. Arms
    and memorials in church 231.――Francis, iii. 2――iv. 64. Family 65
  Mane mine, i. 226
  Manely manor, iv. 112
  ―――― Coleshill manor, iv. 114
  Maneton, Mr. entertained Charles 1st, iii. 42
  Manley, John and Mrs. iii. 347
  ―――― Coleshill, i. 319
  Manlius, iii. 71
  Manly, John, iv. 74
  Mann, Rev. H. of St. Mawgan, iii. 138
  Mannering, i. 350
  Manning family, iii. 255
  Mannington, Sampson, iii. 358
  Manor courts, proceedings of, iv. 55. Subjects of presentment 56
  Manufactory for Spa ornaments, ii. 361
  Manuscripts in the British Museum, extracts from, iii. 409
  Manwaring, Charlotte, i. 67
  Mapowder, i. 402――iv. 161 _bis_
  Marazion, the name of St. Hilary parish, ii. 200, 214, 215 _quat._,
    224 _bis_
  ―――― borough and manor, ii. 170
  ―――― parish, iii. 289――iv. 10.――Road to Helston from, iii. 446. From
    Redruth to 308.――Name explained, iv. 316
  March ab Meircyon, i. 338
  March, Earl of, i. 168 _bis_
  March and Ulster, Roger Mortimer Earl of, i. 64
  Margaret, Queen, i. 169.――Took sanctuary in Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  ―――― St. family, ii. 362
  Margaret’s, St. church, Westminster, ii. 98
  Margate, high water at, iii. 98
  Marghessen foos, iii. 323 _bis_, 324 _ter._ Account of 323
  Marham or Marwyn church, manor of, iii. 116, 117
  Marham Church parish, i. 133――ii. 413――iii. 254, 352――iv. 12, 15,
    131, 152
  MARHAM CHURCH parish, situation and boundaries, name and antiquity,
    the Conqueror’s charter of appropriation, iii. 114. Confirmed by the
    pope, number of vicarages in England, and in Cornwall, Walesbury
    115. Longford hill 116. By Tonkin, name, value, manor of Marwyn
    Church ibid. By Editor, antiquity of the church, manor, Walesborough
    manor, Hilton manor, Wood-Knole, patron, nature of the soil,
    abundance of wood 117. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 118
  Marhasdeythyou, or Market Jew, by Leland, iv. 287
  Marianus the historian, ii. 403
  Mark St. his day, iv. 140
  ―――― well, i. 199
  Marke of Woodhill, i. 143
  Markesju, by Leland, iv. 264
  Market Jew, ii. 200
  Marks of St. Wenn, Miss, iii. 237
  Markwell manor, ii. 363
  Marlborough, ii. 76
  ―――― administration, ii. 217
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 307.――John Churchill, i. 126 _bis_,
    234.――Churchill, iii. 217, 297.――Henrietta, Duchess, i. 126
  Marney of Colquita, Henry first Lord Marney, i. 369
  ―――― of Essex, Henry, family and arms, iii. 65.――Family, iv. 22
  Maroons of Jamaica, treaty with, iii. 300
  Marperion rock, iii. 73
  Marre, Lord, ii. 9
  Marrifield, i. 215
  Mars, i. 295.――Camelford sacred to, ii. 403
  Marsh, Rev. William, ii. 134
  Marshal, Earl, his court, iii. 129, 130 _ter._
  Marshall, Miss, iii. 239
  Martial’s epigrams, notes on, iv. 87
  Martin, i. 386. John, Archbishop of Canterbury 87.――John and Thomas,
    iii. 323
  Martin of Hurston, Anne and John, iii. 186
  ―――― of Pittletown, Dorset, family, iii. 186
  ―――― St. his feast and history, ii. 125.――His day, iii. 310
  ―――― Bishop of Tours in France, iii. 118, 126, 127, 138. His history
    122. Festival 127
  ―――― Pope and martyr, iii. 126
  Martin’s, St. church, iii. 252 _bis_. At Leskeard 16
  ―――― fields and woods, i. 15
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― parish by Looe, i. 320――ii. 265――iii. 13, 245.――Its church and
    rectory, ii. 266
  MARTIN’S, ST. parish, near Looe, situation, boundaries, saint, value
    of benefice, patron, iii. 118. Incumbent, land tax, East Looe town,
    etymology, haven, chapel, charter, jurisdiction, market and fairs,
    arms and writ, Kevorall 119. Tonkin’s quotation of Willis, and
    conjecture respecting the name of the chapel 120. By Editor,
    reference to Bond’s Sketches, elective franchise lost, canal to
    Leskeard, granite hills ibid. Road over the hills, projected new
    road, expence will probably prevent it, situation of East Looe, Mr.
    Bond 121. History of St. Martin of Tours, legends of him, his death
    122. Festival, advowson of the living, monuments in the church. Dr.
    Mayo, statistics 123. Geology by Dr. Boase 124
  ―――― St. parish, in Meneage, i. 301――ii. 318――iii. 110, 127, 128
  MARTIN’S ST. parish, in Meneage, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, daughter to Mawgan, founder, patron, incumbent,
    land tax, Tremayne, iii. 124. Mudgan 125. By Tonkin, saint, daughter
    to Mawgan, value, patron, incumbent 126. By Editor, Tremayne,
    Helnoweth nunnery, doubtful, Meneage district, Hals’s history of St.
    Martin, pope and martyr ibid. Parish feast, notice of Pope St.
    Martin, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, the dry tree 127
  Martin, St. of Tours, ii. 125
  ―――― ancient chapel of, i. 15.――Church, ii. 125
  Martine’s, St. isle, iv. 266
  Martyn, i. 28.――Thomas, ii. 221 _bis_. His map of Cornwall ibid. and
    iii. 454.――W. W. iii. 255
  Martyn’s, St. parish in Kerrier, iii. 61
  Martyr’s church, iii. 180
  Martyrology, iii. 385
  Mary, Queen, ii. 255, 336, 404, 423――iii. 103, 104, 125, 133, 140,
    370――iv. 2, 140.――A design to rob her Exchequer, ii. 198
  ―――― 2nd, called Mary Take-all, ii. 15
  ―――― Rose frigate, loss of, ii. 341, 344
  ―――― the Virgin, ii. 276――iv. 26
  ―――― St. iii. 285.――Truro church, dedicated to, iv. 80, 81
  ―――― St. bell, iii. 210
  ―――― St. chapel, Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. chapel in Quethiock, iii. 373
  ―――― St. church, Savoy, London, ii. 98
  ―――― St. island, iv. 172, 174, 230. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. manor, ii. 275
  ―――― St. parish, old Truro, iv. 92
  ―――― St. of Grace’s Abbey, i. 134
  ―――― St. de Theresa, i. 83
  ―――― Magdalen, St. a chapel at Trecarrell, dedicated to, iii. 42
  ―――― Magdalen, St. church at Launceston, ii. 417, 420――iv.
    132――Parish, statistics, ii. 432
  ―――― de Plym, St. ii. 2, 275, 276
  ―――― de Vale, St. convent, prior of, ii. 275 _bis_, 276. Monastery
    2.――Priory, iii. 395
  ―――― Wick, St. parish, ii. 232――iii. 114
  ―――― Wike, St. i. 215
  Maskelyne, Rev. Dr. Nevill, astronomer royal, his voyage to St.
    Helena, published Meyer’s Tables, ii. 222. Devised the Nautical
    Almanack 223
  Mason, Rev. J. H. of Treneglos and Warbstow, iv. 63.――The poet, i. 71
  Masterman of Restormel, William, i. 244 _bis_
  Matilda, Queen, ii. 211 _ter._
  Matthew of St. Kew family, arms, ii. 337
  Matthew Paris, i. 414
  ―――― of Westminster, his story of the Irish sailing to England in an
    ox-skin boat, ii. 324
  ―――― St. his Gospel, ii. 168
  Matthews of Tresangar, i. 225. John 383 _bis_
  Maugan, i. 209, 212, 301――ii. 155
  ―――― in Meneage, ii. 136
  Maunder, i. 256, 396.――Henry, ii. 195.――Miss, iv. 116
  ―――― of Lanhedrar, Mary, Priscilla, and Thomas, i. 420
  ―――― of Rosecorla, Edward, i. 420
  Maurandia Barclayana, iv. 182
  ―――― semperflorens, iv. 182
  Maurice, Prince, iii. 44.――A commissioner for the King, iv. 189
  Mausa, St. by Leland, iv. 289
  Maw’s, St. castle, inscription made by Leland at, iv. 274
  Mawe, St. his history, ii. 280
  Mawes, St. borough, ii. 279. Account of and arms 276
  ――――’s, St. castle, ii. 1, 2, 27, 279, 280. History of 280. And of
    its governors 276. Its governors and officers salaried by the crown 278
  ――――’s, St. manor, ii. 275
  ――――’s, St. town, ii. 2, 17
  ――――’s, St. village, ii. 280
  Mawgan, John de, iii. 148
  ―――― of Essex family, and arms, iii. 148
  ―――― or St. Mawgan parish in Kerrier, or Mawgan Meneage, ii.
    126――iii. 110, 124, 126, 148, 257, 324, 332, 419
  ―――― in Pider, i. 161, 230, 404, 407――ii. 256――iii. 398. The poor of 153
  ―――― St. iii. 148
  ―――― St. church, iii. 132
  MAWGAN, St. in Meneage parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, iii. 127. Value of benefice, patron, founder,
    incumbent, land tax, description of Meneage district, its
    fertility and breeds of cattle, Goonhilly downs, stones on them,
    Carmenow 128. Its etymology, and the family of Carmenow, singular
    trial between them and the Lord Scrope for their arms 129. Reasons
    on each side 130. Earl Marshal’s sentence, Carmenow’s displeasure
    131. Domestic chapel, burial place and monuments, cross-logged
    figures used before the crusades 132. Reskymer family, Trelowarren
    133. Vyvyan family 134. Tonkin has no additions. By Editor, the
    three distinguished families, Sir Richard Vyvyan a Cavalier 135.
    Committed to the Tower by George 1st, had a daughter born there
    136. Sir R. R. elected for Bristol, antiquity and splendour of
    Trelowarren house, view in Dr. Borlase’s Natural History, manor of
    Carmenow, account of the trial in Anecdotes of Heraldry 137.
    Another controversy for the same coat, church, monuments, patron
    of benefice, saint, feast, statistics, rector, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, the dry tree 138
  MAWGAN, ST. parish in Pyder, by Hals, boundaries, ancient name,
    antiquity of the parish, founder, dedication, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, manor of Lanherne, iii. 139. Arundell
    family 140. Origin of their arms 142. Mr. Bishop, a Roman Catholic
    prelate, Carnanton, history of Attorney-General Noye 143. Approved
    the ship-money tax 144. Hammon Le Strange’s character of him, his
    death and family, amusing story of the court dining with him 145.
    Ben Jonson’s lines, and Charles’s answer, anagram, Noye, a
    promoter of the Civil War, counselled the imprisonment of the
    members of parliament 146. Densill, Densill barrow, Chapel Garder,
    Densill family 147. Tonkin, the saint, an Irish Missionary,
    patron, ancient name 148. Manor of Lanhearne, Camden and Carew
    upon the Arundells 149. Called the Great Arundells 150. By Editor,
    etymology of Arundell, Lysons’s notice of the family, Popery
    fostered at Lanhearne, house now a Carmelite nunnery ibid.
    Situation of church, monuments 151. Manor of Carnarton, memoir of
    the Noyes, the Attorney-General’s will 152. Some of his works
    published 153. List of them 154. A cause he gained for his
    college, their thanks 155. His picture, a copy of it presented by
    the Editor to Exeter college, his family, marriage contract of his
    son Humphrey 156. Issue of the marriage 159. Works of the Rev.
    Cooper Willyams, anecdote of his grandfather’s marriage, Hals’s
    abuse of Colonel Noye, parish statistics, and rector 160. Geology
    by Dr. Boase, parish feast 161
  Mawnan parish, i. 135, 137, 236
  MAWNAN, parish of, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    court baron, barton of Penwarne, iii. 74. Value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, Penwarne and family 75. By Tonkin, manor of
    Trevose ibid. Advowson appendant to it, Penwarne 76. By Editor,
    Lysons’s account of the manors, Tresore, patron of living and
    incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, interesting rocks,
    Rosemullion Head 77
  Mawnoun, St. church, by Leland, iv. 269
  Maws, St. J. Tredinham, M.P. for, i. 416
  Maxentius, i. 237 _bis_
  Maximian, Emperor of Rome, iv. 100
  Maximilian, Emperor, wars against the Turks under, ii. 342, 344
  Maximus, the 2nd Emperor, ii. 37
  May, i. 78, 414.――Elizabeth and Rev. Dr. iii. 356. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Mewan 196.――Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth and St. Mewan, iv. 102
  ―――― of High cross, i. 45
  ―――― of Truro, i. 396
  Maye, Dr. iv. 74. William 187
  Mayer, Tobias, of Gottingen, ii. 222. His tables 222, 223. His widow
    allowed a premium of £3000, 223
  Maynard, i. 36――ii. 361. John 196. Sir John Sergeant 362 _bis_.――Sir
    John, iii. 5, 405, 406
  Mayne, Rev. Cuthbert, iii. 357, 360, 369, 370 _bis_. Suffered death 358
  ―――― Screffes, iii. 80; or Scriffer, ii. 284
  Mayo or Mayow, John, M.D. iii. 123 and note 250 _bis_. Memoir of
    251. His works 251, 252. Philip of Looe 250 _quat._ P. W. 250.
    Family 223, 250, 252. Monuments to 253
  Mayo of Clevyan, ii. 198
  ―――― of Truro, John, ii. 302
  Mayors of Exeter, ii. 189, 196
  Mayow, Dr. iv. 30. Mr. 74. Family 37
  ―――― of Bray, i. 354
  Mayson, Rev. Charles and Rev. Peter, rectors of Lezant, iii. 43
  Mead, Dr. iii. 85
  Mean in Sannen, seven Saxon Kings said to have met at, ii. 284
  ―――― village, iii. 433, 435. Story connected with 433
  Meath county, iii. 86
  Medhop of Trenant, i. 320 _bis_
  Median castles, ii. 423
  Mediterranean sea, iv. 168.――Regular communication with Falmouth,
    ii. 18
  Medland of Tremail in St. Petherwyn, iii. 137
  Megara in Greece, Bishop of, i. 75.――Thomas Vivian, Bishop of, iii.
    279.――Bishopric, arms of, i. 75, 94――iv. 161
  Megavissey, i. 413
  Mehinnet parish, ii. 371
  Mein Egles rocks, transport lost on, ii. 326
  Melaleuca hypericifolia, iv. 182
  Melania, St. iii. 164, 165
  Melanius, St. iii. 257
  Melgisy manor, iii. 382
  Melhuish, near Kirton, Devon, etymology, iii. 135
  ―――― Mr. ii. 97
  ―――― of Northan, Devon, family, iii. 61
  ―――― of Penryn, Jane, iii. 134. Thomas 61, 134
  Melianthus, iv. 182
  ―――― coccineus major, iv. 182
  Melianus, King or Duke of Cornwall, iii. 59, 224
  Melina, St. iii. 257, 258
  Meliorus, St. iii. 224
  Mellen, St. i. 310
  Mellin, St. parish, ii. 309
  Mellingy bridge, account of, iii. 327
  ―――― mill, iii. 326
  Mellion, i. 316.――St. parish, ii. 375, or Mellyn, iii. 161, 345,
    347, 371
  MELLION, OR MELLYN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Newton
    manor, Mr. Coryton, one of the members imprisoned by Charles 1st,
    iii. 161. Coryton family, Crocadon 162. John Trevisa translated the
    Bible, comparison with Wickliffe’s and Tyndall’s, Westcot,
    Pentillie, or Pillaton 163. Sir James Tillie’s singular will 164. By
    Tonkin, saint, patron, Newton ibid. By Editor, Hals’s history of St.
    Melania, Coryton family 165. Vindication of Sir James Tillie 166.
    St. Mellitus, Bede’s life of him, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 167
  Mellior, St. i. 151
  Mellitus, first Bishop of London, afterwards Archbishop of
    Canterbury, iii. 167
  ―――― St. Pope Gregory’s letter to, ii. 288
  Mellyn, St. i. 409
  Menabilly, account of, iv. 101, 107
  Menadarva, i. 161 _quat._, 164
  Menage, i. 192
  Menagwins, etymology and possessors of, i. 43
  Mendicant friars, i. 83――iv. 145
  Meneage, i. 350.――Part of Kerryer hundred, ii. 358
  ―――― district, in Lizard, iii. 257, 419, 422. Described 128
  Menevia, St. David, Archbishop of, iii. 292.――Bishopric, i. 305
  Menfre, i. 2
  Menheniot manor, iii. 170
  ―――― or Menhinnet parish, iii. 13, 373
  MENHENIOT parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, iii. 167.
    Manor, jurisdiction, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, etymology, the manor, Poole, described by
    Carew 168. Fair, Tencreek, an oven fourteen feet in diameter,
    unknown tree, Trehavock 169. Curtutholl, Trewint, Dr. Moorman
    first taught the offices of religion in English, the Latin
    service, books called in, hospital for lepers 170. By Tonkin,
    Pool, Menheniot or Tregelly manor ibid. By the Editor, size of the
    church, its tower and monuments, patron of the benefice, the
    incumbent to be of Exeter college, vicarage endowed with the great
    tithes, the incumbents, Mr. Holwell and his works 171. Cartuther,
    other places noticed by Lysons, the most fertile parish in the
    county, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Clicker Tor 172. The
    Geology interesting. By the Editor, errica vagans, phenomena of
    flowers, no wild rose in the southern hemisphere, nor heath in
    America 173. Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries, remarks on the system
    of nature and succession of the various species 174
  Menhynet, ii. 59
  Menhynyet, i. 409
  Mentz, Archbishopric, founded by St. Boniface, iv. 126
  Menvor, i. 168
  Menwhilly, ii. 91
  Menwinnion, ii. 241
  Meny, St. iii. 190
  Mepham, Simon, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 115
  Meran, St. iii. 177
  Merchant Tailor’s school, ii. 407
  Mercia, King of, i. 49.――Penda, King of, ii. 284――iii. 284
  Merewenna, i. 2
  Merina, St. iii. 177 _bis_
  Merionethshire, i. 382
  Merivale priory, i. 27
  Merlin, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 322 _bis_, 334, 339.――His prophecy, iii.
    433.――Of Arthur, i. 326, 336 _bis_
  Merran, St. parish, ii. 265
  MERRAN, ST. Merin, Meryn, or Merryn parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name and etymology, church, cemetery of St.
    Constantine, converted to a dwelling house, modern church, St.
    Constantine’s well, Trevose, iii. 175. Productive, but dangerous to
    shipping, Harlyn, Peter family, the parish modern 176. Saint,
    festival, his death, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, donation of Mrs. Tregoweth 177. Tonkin adds
    nothing but a notice of the saint’s name. By the Editor, no Saint
    Merina, Harlyn, Perthcothen ibid. Manor of Trevose, church,
    Catacluse stone, ornamented fonts of it here, at Padstow, and in St.
    Constantine’s church, description of St. Constantine’s, font and
    pillars handsomely carved 178. Catacluse cliffs and a pier, feast of
    Constantine, and of St. Merryn, impropriation of tithes, the three
    Mr. Gurneys, hurling, account of it in Carew, statistics, incumbent,
    patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 179. Trevose head 180
  Merrifield, i. 134
  Merrin, or Merryn, St. church, iii. 178. The living held by the name
    of Gurney above a century 179
  ―――― parish, iii. 277
  Merryan, St. i. 404
  Merther, i. 113. Situation and possessor 44
  ―――― or Merthyr manor, i. 241 _bis_
  ―――― parish, i. 242, 417――ii. 2――iii. 207, 209, 210, 214, 354
  Merthyn, in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Merthyr church, iii. 182
  MERTHYR parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, saint,
    his well and chapel, etymology of Eglos-Merthyr, daughter to Probus,
    mode of nomination to the benefice, iii. 180. Contests respecting
    it, deed of agreement 181. Variation in value, ancient name,
    consolidation with Probus, endowment, incumbent, land tax,
    Tresawsan, James Hals 182. His history, Governor of Montserrat,
    recalled by the King, gained over to the rebels, made prisoner at
    the siege of Plymouth, and committed to Lidford castle 183. His life
    spared, comparison of Sir Richard Grenville with Richard 3rd, James
    1st, and Caligula, Hals detained at Lidford, and released by the
    arrival of Essex, Dr. Brown’s verses on Lidford castle 184. Custom
    of executing criminals before trial in Germany, Switzerland, and
    Carinthia, Hals’s family 186. Trewortha Vean and its possessors 188.
    By Tonkin, a daughter church to Probus ibid. Cornelly held with it,
    incumbent, manor of Fentongallen 189. Editor, Trevilian bridge, its
    situation, new road from Bodmin to Truro, Earl of Falmouth’s new
    road to Tregothnan, fairs, surrender of Lord Hopton’s army, church
    small, wooden tower, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 190
  Merton college, Oxford, iv. 86
  ―――― convent, i. 300
  Mervyn, St. parish, iii. 282
  Merwyn, Sir Edmund, iii. 206
  Meuthion, i. 11
  Mevagissey parish, iii. 194, 319
  MEVAGISSEY parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, name,
    saints, ancient name and its etymology, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, land tax, original name, iii. 190. Penwarne
    Trelevan 191. By Tonkin, church, tower, bells sold by the rebels
    ibid. Editor, Tonkin’s details omitted, Lysons’s additions, lately
    a poor fishing village, pier, convenient for the pilchard fishery,
    number of houses, Porthilly, manor of Trelevan and of Penwarne,
    capacity of the pool, Porthmellin cove, account of the manor and
    barton of Trelevan 192. Manors of Petuan and Penwarne 193. Barton
    of Trewincy, disposal of the tithes, a station for fishing with
    the seine nets, nature of the bay, fish tithed, vicarage house,
    glebe improved, singularities of Dr. Lyne, statistics 194.
    Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 195
  Mevaguisey, ii. 105
  Mevassary, i. 419
  Mevennus abbey, i. 98
  Mewan, i. 41
  ―――― St. Beacon, iii. 401
  ―――― parish, i. 251, 413――iii. 190, 401, 448, 450, 455. Mr. Borlase
    rector of 54
  MEWAN, ST. parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax,
    Polgoth mine, iii. 195. Lefisick 196. Tonkin, patronage, incumbents,
    manor of Trewoone ibid. Editor, Hals’s various etymologies, pleasing
    appearance of the church, road from Truro to St. Austell improving
    ibid. Polgoth mine, increased working of mines, manor and village of
    Burngullo, manor of Trewoon, statistics 197. Rector, and Geology by
    Dr. Boase 198
  Mewla, i. 11
  Michael, St. Abbot of Glastonbury, iv. 26
  ―――― St. the Archangel, ii. 172, 174, 283――iii. 198, 200, 208,
    222.――Painted with wings, ii. 206. Vision of him 206, 208
  ―――― St. bells christened after, iii. 210. Churches dedicated to
    240, 398
  ―――― St. chapel at Rame Head, iii. 375
  ―――― St. Carhayes church, iii. 450
  ―――― St. Carhayes parish, i. 310, 413.――Or Carhays, iv. 117
  MICHAEL, ST. CARHAYES parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, endowment, dedication, impropriation,
    patron, incumbent, iii. 198. Value of benefice, land tax, Trevanion
    and family 199. Tonkin, name, manor of Carhayes, Trevanion family
    200. Description of the house 201. Trevanion, house and park, Porown
    Berry, Hurris, Treberrick, church, situation, description 202.
    Tower, tablet to Mr. Hooker 203. Editor, motives of the civil wars,
    part taken in those of York and Lancaster by the families of
    Edgecumbe, Trevanion and Bodrigan ibid. The two first on the winning
    side, division of Bodrigan’s property, the Trevanions unsuccessful
    on behalf of Charles, and compounded for their state, letter from
    Mr. John Trevanion to Mr. Henry Davis 204. Trevanion’s issue 205.
    Parishes of Rogate and Selburne in Sussex, Arun river and dale,
    manor of Fyning, parish church, etymology 206. Consolidated with St.
    Stephen and St. Dennis, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 207
  ―――― St. de Lammana island, iv. 26 _bis_
  ―――― St. de Loo island, iv. 238
  ―――― St. Penkivell church, Fentongollan aisle in, iii. 187
  ―――― St. Penkivell manor, iii. 189
  ―――― St. Penkivell parish, i. 140, 141, 215――ii. 356――iii. 180, 354,
    464.――School at, ii. 32
  MICHAEL, ST. PENKIVELL parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation,
    boundaries, antiquity, iii. 207. Dedication, value, patron,
    incumbent, land-tax, endowment, Fentongollan aisle and chantry
    208. Fentongollan, its buildings, remembered by the writer, marble
    tomb-stone, the church a quarter cathedral 209. Bells baptized,
    form of the ceremony 210. Tonkin, hundred and situation, should
    have been named Fentongollan ibid. Fentongollan manor, its
    possessors 211. Once magnificent house now pulled down, Mopas
    Ferry, oysters spoiled by the copper ore, Treganyan, church tower,
    rectory house, Tregothnan 212. Boscawen family 213. Editor, Hals’s
    history diffuse ibid. That of Lysons substituted, Lysons, manor of
    Penkivell and of Fentongollan, hospitality of John Carminow 214.
    Tregothnan, Nancarrow ibid. Editor, Boscawen family, their origin
    215. Took the liberal side in the rebellion and revolution 216.
    Hugh Boscawen arrested Sir Richard Vyvyan, Mr. Basset and others
    on the accession of George 1st, feuds occasioned by that step,
    Boscawen ennobled, imbecility and marriage of the 2nd Lord
    Falmouth 217. Admiral Boscawen, the Nelson of his time, his
    popularity in the navy 218. His marriage and issue, memoir of Dr.
    Walcot 219. His lines on the death of W. G. Boscawen 220.
    Situation and advantages of Tregothnan, old house of great
    antiquity, beauty and convenience of the new one, old church and
    massive tower, statistics, incumbent 221. Geology by Dr. Boase 222
  Michael, St. rectory, i. 72
  ――――’s hold, iii. 298
  ――――’s, St. borough, Mr. Hussey, M.P. for, ii. 34
  ――――’s, St. chair, ii. 175 _bis_, 200, 205, 207
  ――――’s, St. chapel, ii. 201
  ――――’s, St. mount, i. 88 _bis_, 261――ii. 80, 169, 170――iii. 274,
    287, 298, 311――iv. 147, 165. By Leland 287. Its history. (_See St.
    Hilary parish_).――Cornish name for, ii. 200.――Abbot of, ii. 136,
    169, 170
  ――――’s St. Mount’s bay, iii. 81 _bis_, 82
  ――――’s St. Mount island, iv. 238
  ――――’s St. Mount monastery upon, iii. 136.――Priory of, ii. 208.
    Dissolved 191. Its property 208.――Priors of, i. 261――ii. 127, 209
    iii. 124, 128――iv. 164, 165
  ――――’s St. Mount in Normandy, ii. 176; and abbey in Periculo Maris
    208 _bis_, 210
  ――――’s St. shrine, ii. 215
  ――――’s St. well, iii. 211
  Michaelstow beacon, ii. 405
  ―――― Mary, and family, iii. 222
  ―――― parish, i. 1――ii. 401――iv. 42, 44, 93, 95
  MICHAELSTOW parish, Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, land-tax, Michaelstow family, iii.
    222. Tonkin, name, patron, incumbent ibid. Editor, Helston in Trig
    manor, Helsbury park, ruins of an ancient castle, monuments in the
    church, Treveighan village, Trevenin, advowson, present rector,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 223
  Michel manor, i. 389. Account of 392
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 262
  Michell borough, i. 391――iv. 20.――Account of 388. Members for 389.
    Compact for elections 391. Last election 391. F. Scobell, M.P. for
    410. Illustrious representatives 390.――Humphrey Courtenay, M.P. for,
    ii. 385
  ―――― Christopher, iii. 319. Paul 382. Richard 387.――John, iv. 77.
    Matthew 98 _bis_. His widow 98. Robert 55. Samuel 98. Mr. 74
  ―――― of Harlyn, Miss, iii. 176. Heiress and family 177
  ―――― foundation, Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139
  ―――― or Mitchell parish, ii. 280. An adjective 171
  Middle ages, ii. 215
  ―――― Amble, ii. 336
  Middleham church, iii. 114
  Middlesex county, ii. 147
  Middleton church, i. 248
  Midhope, Rev. Stephen, of St. Martin’s, near Looe, turned
    anabaptist, iii. 123
  Midhurst, Sussex, iii. 206
  Midinnia, St. iii. 442
  Midmain rock, iv. 28
  Midshipmen subjected to ten years’ service, iii. 218
  Midwinter, Robert, ii. 196
  Milbrok, by Leland, iv. 282
  Mileton of Pengersick, Miss, iv. 22
  Milford haven, ii. 182
  Militon, ii. 169. Job 193
  ―――― of Pengerwick, i. 136
  Millaton manor, iii. 44
  Millett, i. 268. John 365.――Grace, Humphrey and Mary, ii. 218. Rev.
    Mr. 282. Family monuments 219.――Rev. John Curnow and Robert Oke,
    iii. 343
  ―――― of Gurlin, St. Erth, William, ii. 224
  Millington of Pengersick in Breage, ii. 212
  Millinike, account of, ii. 67
  Millinoweth, iii. 319
  Milliton, i. 124. Story of Mr. 125. Job and William ibid. Arms ibid.
  Mills, Rev. Mr. of Veryan, iv. 122
  ―――― of Exeter, Miss, iii. 162
  Milor church, iii. 59. Churchyard, Milorus buried in 59
  ―――― parish, ii. 2, 92, 337――iii. 305. _See Mylor_
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ――――’s, St. by Leland, iv. 271
  Milorus, a Cornish prince, iii. 59
  Milton, John, i. 310
  Miners, lines upon, ii. 131
  ―――― militia, ii. 85
  Minerva, i. 295
  Mingoose, i. 12
  Minheneth, by Leland, iv. 281
  Minors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, i. 211
  Minster church, iii. 111
  ―――― parish, ii. 48, 49 _quat._――iii. 22, 39, 112――iv. 66, 68
  MINSTER parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, iii. 232. Editor, ruins of a monastery,
    Tanner calls it an alien priory ibid. Dugdale’s additions, manor of
    Pollifont an appendage to the living, profits of the manor,
    situation of the church, monuments, epitaph 233. No church tower,
    legend of the bells, Botreaux castle and honour 234. Cotton and
    Phillipps family, attempt on the life of George 3rd, site of
    Botreaux castle, the great house, port of Botreaux castle,
    exportation of slate, and importation of coal and lime 235.
    Capabilities of the place for an extensive commerce, patrons of the
    living, late incumbent, manor of Worthy vale, inscribed stone
    marking the site of King Arthur’s death wound, statistics, present
    rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 236
  ―――― priory, iii. 39――iv. 105.――Prior of, ii. 49
  ―――― in Kerrier, iii. 111 _bis_.――An alien priory, iv. 101. Prior of 68
  ―――― in Tolcarne, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Minver, St. Church, i. 74.――Spire, latitude and longitude of, iii. 281
  ―――― or Minvor, St. parish, i. 367, 382――ii. 67, 332.――Rev. William
    Sandys, vicar of, iii. 10
  MINVER, ST. or St. Mynfer parish, Hals, a vicarage, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent,
    land-tax, Trevillva barton, iii. 237. MS. here deficient. Tonkin
    only repeats part of Hals. Editor, former impropriation, value of
    benefice, manor of Bodmin bestowed on Sternhold for his version of
    the Psalms, Mr. Sandy’s 238. Travelled with Lord de Dunstanville,
    called the Cardinal, monument to Mrs. Sandys, manor of Penmear,
    Trevernon 239. Monument to Thomas Darell, Pentire point, Trevelver,
    dangerous estuary, bridge over it, two district chapels, highlands
    and lowlands, sale of the bells 240. Though inscribed Alfredus Rex,
    lines on bells, especially Great Tom of Oxford, statistics, present
    vicar and patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 241
  Miracle of transporting St. Catherine’s body, ii. 3. Of the
    thundering legion 76
  Misall Romanorum, i. 393
  Mitchel of Hengar, i. 131
  Mitchell borough, i. 61――iii. 81, 322, 324. Description of 268.
    Constitution 271
  ―――― Robert, ii. 96. Rev. Mr. 299, 302, 315.――Rev. Mr. of Maker,
    iii. 101. Rev. Mr. of Merthyr 190. Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan
    195.――James, John, and Thomas, brothers, iv. 73. Captain 94
  ―――― of Truro, i. 398 _bis_
  ―――― Humphrey Borlase, Lord, iii. 268
  ―――― Morton manor, ii. 416
  Mithian manor, i. 7――ii. 192. Free chapel in 12
  Moddern, ii. 286
  Moderet, John, i. 283
  Modeton, iii. 438
  Modford in Launceston, iii. 136
  Modishole manor, iii. 269
  Mogul’s country, ii. 227
  Mogun bridge, by Leland, and trajectus, iv. 269
  Mogun’s, St. church, iii. 332
  ―――― creek, iii. 332
  Mohammed, the Sultan, interfered in the contest of the Paleolagi,
    took Constantinople, &c. ii. 367. Puts an envoy in irons 368
  Mohun, i. 63, 302. John 65, 255. Reginald 65, 255, 301, 356 Sir
    Reginald 7, 65 _bis_, 345, 346 _quat._ 356. Sibella 8. William 7,
    301. Arms 351, 356. Pedigree from the Conquest 66.――John de, ii.
    409 _bis_. Sir John 410. Sir John or Sir Reginald, story of 402.
    Reginald 56, 409 _bis_. Sir Reginald 410. Family 409, 410 _bis_,
    412. Monuments 411.――Reginald de, iii. 293, 303. Family 303.――Sir
    William, iv. 15. Family 44. Arms 96.――Lord, i. 65――ii. 410――iii.
    315――iv. 14, 186.――Charles Lord, i. 65. His duel with the Duke of
    Hamilton 66 and 67. His character 67. Wife drowned ibid.――John,
    Lord 65, 255.――John, Lord, of Dunster castle, Somersetshire, ii.
    409 _bis_.――Warwick, Lord, i. 65――ii. 410
  Mohun of Hall, Sir William, ii. 56
  ―――― of Lithony, i. 420. Warwick, ib.
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 255. Warwick, William, and arms 255
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 356 _bis_
  Mola, ancient chapel at, i. 12
  Molesworth, i. 61 _bis_, 74, 266 _bis_, 397. Hon. John 368. Sir John
    399. Sir William 117. Rev. William 117, 406.――Rev. H. ii. 364. Sir
    John 273. Sir W. 88. Family 151, 273, 356, 357.――Hender, iii. 214.
    John 234. Sir William 335. Family 334.――Sir John, iv. 64. Rev. W. of
    St. Winnow 159 _bis_. Family 44, 65, 127
  ―――― of Molesworth, Sir Walter, a crusader, i. 369, 375
  ―――― of Pencarrow, i. 416. Hender 370 _bis_. Sir Hender 370 _bis_,
    375. John 370 _ter._, 375, 397. Sir John 116, 370, 374, 375. Arms
    370.――Family, ii. 274, 334――iii. 170――iv. 163
  ―――― of Pendavy, Sir William, i. 377
  ―――― of Tretane, John, i. 369, 370
  Molton, ii. 76
  Mona, i. 194
  Monasticon Anglicanum, i. 168――ii. 62, 176――iii. 103, 111――iv. 6,
    100, 156
  Monck, Mr. of Devon, ii. 251.――General, his conduct characterized,
    iii. 460
  ―――― of Potheridge, Devon, Humphrey, ii. 251
  ―――― frigate, iii. 186
  Monckton, Henry de, i. 383.――Family, ii. 354
  ―――― Arundell, Robert, Viscount Galway, ii. 354
  Monheere, George, iii. 387
  Monk, General, i. 116――ii. 26――iv. 75 _bis_.――His refusal to give or
    take quarter, and victory over the Dutch, entertained by Capt.
    Penrose, ii. 26. Again defeats the Dutch 27. Sir John Grenville, the
    bearer of the King’s letters to 345. Rev. Nicholas, brother of the
    general 345.――Family, i. 36, 302――ii. 5
  ―――― frigate, ii. 28. Discharged unpaid 29
  Monks of St Benedict, i. 73; or Benedictine, ii. 208
  Monmouth, Jeffery of, Bishop of St. Asaph, i. 342
  ―――― Duke of, his invasion, iii. 160
  Monotholites, ii. 125
  Monpesson, Sir Giles, i. 223
  Montacute, William, Earl of Salisbury, i. 339.――Earl, ii. 91.
    Marquis 182
  ―――― priory in Somersetshire, iii. 261 _bis_――iv. 112 _ter._, 113
    _bis_, 122. Monks of 112
  Montagu, Lady Anne and Edward, Earl of Sandwich, iii. 104
  Montague, M. A. Browne, of Cowdray castle, Sussex, Lord, iii. 231
  Montgomery, Arnold de, i. 34.――Roger de, Earl of Arundell, iii. 142
  ―――― iv. 8
  Monton, David de, i. 246
  Montpelier, iii. 400
  Montreuil, ii. 127. In France, siege of 196
  Moone, Thomas, iii. 346
  Moor, Mr. i. 254
  Moore, Sir Thomas, ii. 53
  Moorman, Dr. John, Vicar of Menheniot, iii. 170
  Moorwinstow parish, iv. 16
  Mopas passage, iii. 212
  Moran, St. iv. 277
  Morden, by Leland, iv. 270
  Mordred, cousin of King Arthur, i. 337, 372.――His battle with
    Arthur, ii. 402. Mortally wounded 403
  Morea, ii. 366 _bis_, 367. Attacked by the Turks 367. Despots of 367
    _bis_
  Morehead family, property sold, iii. 20
  Moreland in Lesnewith, iii. 133
  Moreps, ii. 121
  Moreri, i. 111.――His Dictionnaire Historique, ii. 207――iv. 157
  Mores manor, i. 202, 203, 204
  Moresk manor, iii. 354
  MOREWINSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    and saint, a vicarage, value of benefice, patron, impropriation,
    iii. 254. Editor, later value and impropriation, present
    impropriation, rise of the river Tamar, west part rugged, situation
    and size of church ibid. Monuments, villages, Stanbury manor, error
    of Lysons, Stanbury, Bishop of Hereford, Tonacombe Lea farm 255.
    Cleave house, Chapel house, statistics, late vicar, Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Dunstone rocks, cliffs of Stanbury creek 256
  Morgan, Rev. W. A. of Lewannick, iii. 38.――Of Tresmere, iv. 65
  Morice, Barbara and Sir William, i. 116.――Family, ii. 256. Sir
    Nicholas 175. Sir William, family and property 334
  ―――― of Werrington, Catherine, i. 265, 266. Sir Nicholas and Sir
    William 265.――Family, iii. 178.――Edward, iv. 94
  ―――― St. Oratory of, ii. 75
  Morike church, iii. 190
  Moris manor, i. 396――ii. 2.――Duchy manor, iv. 72
  Morisk castle, iv. 228
  Morrice, i. 74
  Morris, Sir William and his family, iii. 460. Rev. Mr. 97. Mr.
    executed 184
  ―――― town, i. 266
  Morrison, Rev. F. H. ii. 416
  Morsa parish, ii. 282
  Morshead, Rev. Edward, i. 159.――William, ii. 154. Mr. 87. Family,
    iii. 172――iv. 60
  ―――― of Cartuther, Sir John, i. 321
  Mortaigne or Morton, Earl of, ii. 208, 358, 399. His market 70.
    Robert 175, 176, 202, 203 _bis_, 211, 235, 238, 379, 384, 422. His
    charter to St. Michael’s mount 210. William, Earl of, said to have
    built Lanceston castle, and to have drawn the inhabitants from
    Dunhevet to that town 418
  Mortayne, iii. 438
  Morth, John and William, iv. 22
  Mortimer, Eleanor, i. 64. Roger 339. Roger, Earl of March and Ulster 64
  Morton, iii. 14, 65――iv. 22
  ―――― Earl of, i. 134――iii. 261, 264, 276. John 296. Robert 112, 203
    _bis_, 418, 419. William 203 _ter._――Robert, iii. 14, 27, 44, 46,
    117, 291, 346, 349, 352, 451 _bis_. Robert Guelam 462.――Robert, iv.
    15, 67. William 110, 122.――Matilda, Countess of, ii. 211
  ―――― Earl of Cornwall and, iii. 22
  ―――― and Cornwall, Earl of, William, ii. 175.――Robert, iv. 102, 118,
    153. William 100
  ―――― Thomas, mayor of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 2, 3. Family
    and arms 3
  ―――― honor, iv. 96, 112
  ―――― manor, ii. 235――iv. 68
  ―――― prior of, ii. 49
  Morun, St. unknown, ii. 356
  Morva or Morvah, parish, iii. 82, 89, 425 _bis_――iv. 164
  MORVA parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, daughter to
    Madderne, etymology, Tregamynyon, iii. 242. The Golden Lanyon, his
    improvement in roofing houses, Carvolghe manor 243. Editor, church
    re-built, its situation, patron, curious entrenchment 243.
    Described, called Castle Chiowne, destroyed by depredations, a
    Cromleigh, Carn Galva, statistics 244. Geology by Dr. Boase 245
  Morval manor, iii. 246, 248, 361. House 249
  ―――― parish, iii. 427, 463. By Looe 118
  MORVAL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, a vicarage, value, etymology, iii. 245. Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology mistaken, Sir Hugh de Morville one of Becket’s
    murderers, state of Cornwall during the wars of the roses, murder
    and robbery of John Glynn 246. His widow’s petition to parliament,
    schedule of property stolen 247. Buller family 248. Morval manor
    house, improved 249. Bray, epitaph on Philip Mayow, Dr. John Mayow
    250. Dr. Beddoes, Sir Humphrey Davy introduced to him by the
    Editor, Wood’s memoir of Dr. Mayow 251. His works, Polgover,
    Lydcott, Wringworthy, Sand Place village, situation of church,
    monuments 252. Impropriation of tithes, patron, incumbent, Bindon
    hill, prospect from it, road passes nearly over its summit,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 253
  Morval town, iii. 247
  Morvall, i. 316――ii. 59
  Morville, Sir Hugh de, iii. 246
  Morwell, by Leland, iv. 282
  Morwen, St. iii. 116, 254
  Morwenna, i. 2
  Morwinstow, ii. 340
  Morysk castle, iv. 229
  Moses, ii. 65
  Motiled, ii. 427
  Moune, William, i. 65 _bis_
  Mount of the tomb, ii. 208
  Mount or Mount’s bay, i. 227――ii. 118, 120, 169, 174, 176, 182, 207.
    Trees found in 173――iii. 46, 48, 78, 83, 97, 98, 215, 283, 375. _See
    St. Michael’s, Mount’s Bay_
  ―――― Calvary, a Cornish poem, i. 109――ii. 99 _bis_, 152. Extract
    from 99; and Keigwyn’s translation of, iii. 288. Both published by
    Editor 329
  ―――― Charles, i. 368
  ―――― Edgecumbe, iii. 108, 110. Account of 107. Partly in Devon 104.
    Described by Carew ibid. Possessors of 101. House built 103. The
    only seat in Cornwall superior to Tregothnan 221
  ―――― Edgecumbe, cliff at, iii. 380
  ―――― Edgecumbe, Countess of, ii. 364.――Earl of, iii. 29, 195,
    379――iv. 92.――Lord, i. 154――ii. 100, 393
  ―――― Seyntaubyn, i. 262
  ―――― Sinai, monastery upon, ii. 37
  ―――― Stephens, John, his life and tragical death, and speculations
    upon the latter, i. 84
  ―――― Toby, i. 158
  Mountague hill, Somersetshire, ii. 283
  Mounts, i. 84
  Mountserat island, iii. 183
  Mourton, James, ii. 193
  Mousehole manor, iii. 91
  ―――― village, iii. 286, 288, 290, 291. Account of 286. Destroyed by
    the Spaniards 91
  Moushole, ii. 174
  Mowne, William, i. 66 _bis_. Reginald, Lord Dunster 66. William,
    Lord Dunster 66. William, Earl of Somerset 66 _bis_
  Mowpass passage, iii. 464
  Mowsehole, by Leland, iv. 286
  Moyes, J. R. ii. 160 _bis_
  Moyle, i. 44, 45, 74. Ann and David 260. Nathaniel 371.――Family, ii.
    67. Thomas 67. Miss 77, 255. Mr. 77 _quin._, 78, 350
  Moyle of Bake, i. 222. Sir Walter 375.――Walter, ii. 76, 77. His
    works 76.――Sir Walter and his daughter, iii. 2
  ―――― of Beke, John, Sir Walter, and arms, ii. 67
  ―――― of Bodmin, ii. 67
  ―――― of Boke, Elizabeth and Sir Walter, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Moyle, ii. 67
  ―――― of Oxford, ii. 67
  ―――― of Pendavy, i. 375. Nathaniel ibid.
  ――――of Trefurans, ii. 67
  Moyn, Reginald, Earl of Somerset, i. 66
  Mudgan, iii. 126. Account of 125
  Mudge, Colonel, iv. 31
  Mullion cove, iii. 259
  ―――― parish, i. 301; or Mullyan, ii. 116, 126――iii. 128, 416, 419,
    424. In Kerrier 164
  MULLION parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name,
    dedication, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, endowment,
    value, the saint, iii. 257. Editor, church ancient, painted glass
    ibid. Monument and epitaph to Mr. Favell, tower, tithes, manor of
    Pradannock, divided into higher and lower, Clahar manor, parish
    feast, St. Malo’s day, late vicar, statistics 258. Geology by Dr.
    Boase, Kinance cove, Mullion cove, Bolerium cove. Editor, beauty of
    Kinance cove, description of it and of the Cornish rocks generally
    259. Erica vagans and asparagus officinalis 260
  Mundy, i. 232 _ter._ John, _bis_, Sir John and arms 232
  ―――― of Rialton, Anne and John, iii. 186
  Mundye, Anthony, ii. 10
  Murray, Mr. of Albemarle-street, iii. 251
  Murth, Jeffrey and John, iv. 25. Mr. 24. Family ibid. Arms 25
  Musgrave, Dr. W. letters to, ii. 76
  Musical air, ancient, found in Scotland, Ireland, and Cornwall,
    supposed to be British, ii. 166
  Muttenham, etymology and resident, i. 104
  Mydhop of Essex, Henry, Roger and arms, i. 320
  Mylbrooke, iv. 291
  Mylor manor, iii. 228 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 11
  MYLOR parish, Hals lost, situation, boundaries, saint, value of
    benefice, a vicarage, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Carclew
    barton and its possessors, iii. 224. House built by Mr. Kempe, tin
    225; and antimony, Restronget manor, and passage with a ferry boat,
    part of Penryn manor, Trefusis and Tregoze manors 226. Trefusis
    family, house, &c. Nankersy, its etymology, town of Flushing, the
    Dutch would have made it commercial, Mr. Trefusis improved it at
    great expense 227. Better situated for packets than Falmouth, Mylor
    manor, situation and description of the church 228. Editor, error in
    the valuation, monuments in the church 228. Westmacott’s to Reginald
    Cocks, Carclew, the Lemon family, Polvellan described 229. Colonel
    Lemon a proficient in music, Sir William improved Carclew, Sir
    Charles’s further improvements, erica ciliaris, Trefusis family 230.
    Situation of Trefusis, Flushing an elegant town. Tonkin’s etymology
    of Restrongel, present vicar, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 231
  ―――― pool, iii. 224, 228
  Mynor, Anne and Henry, i. 222
  Mynors of St. Enedor, Anne and Henry, iii. 135
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Anne 249
  Myra, in Lysia, St. Nicholas, Archbishop of, iv. 172

  Naal or Natal Abbot, iii. 432
  Naboth’s vineyard, i. 329
  Nacothan, John, iii. 387
  Nampara, iii. 326, 327
  Nampetha, iii. 319
  Nancar, account of, i. 256
  Nancarrow estate, i. 19――iii. 215
  ―――― family, i. 20
  Nance in Illogan, iv. 129
  ―――― i. 298.――Family and arms, ii. 239.――John, iv. 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Chester family, iii. 382
  ―――― of Nance, ii. 337
  ―――― Mellin, iii. 326
  Nanceolvern, possessors of, iii. 88
  Nanfan of Trethewoll, John, Richard and arms, i. 408
  Nanfon, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Nankersy, tenement, account of, iii. 227. A Dutch town on it ibid.
  Nankivell, Rev. Edw. of St. Agnes and Stithians, iv. 5
  Nanquitty, ii. 57
  Nansant church, ii. 256
  Nansanton, Nassington or Naffeton, iii. 334, 335
  Nansaugh barton, account of, ii. 354
  Nansavallan, account of, by the Editor, ii. 305. By Hals 299. By
    Tonkin 303
  ―――― farm, improvement of, ii. 306
  Nanskevall or Typpel, of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard and arms, iv. 139
  Nansloe, account of, ii. 139
  Nansoath manor, account of, ii. 353
  Nansperian, i. 349 _ter._ Arms 349
  Nanswhiddon, account of, i. 223
  Nanswidden in St. Colomb, ii. 143
  Nantellan, i. 257
  Nants, ii. 236. Account of 238
  Nantval, i. 413
  Napleton, Rev. John, ii. 33
  Napoleon’s use of the Pitt diamond, i. 69
  Narbonne, general chapter of, i. 81
  Nare, the, i. 330
  ―――― point, i. 330
  Nash, the architect, iii. 205
  Nation, Rev. Mr. ii. 332
  Natural history, the learned Dr. Lombard ignorant of, ii. 408
  Naunton’s, St. chapel and well, i. 257
  Nautical Almanack, description of, conducted by Dr. Maskelyne, since
    improved, ii. 233
  Nava family, ii. 80
  Naval affairs after the seven years war, ii. 246
  ―――― power, iii. 154
  Navarre, Blanche, Queen of, iii. 19
  Naw Voz or Naw Whoors, i. 220
  Nectan, i. 2――iv. 156
  ―――― St. or Nighton, iv. 155. His history 155
  ―――― chapel, iv. 157
  Nelson, Admiral Boscawen compared with, iii. 218
  Neocæsarea, i. 388
  Neot, St. iii. 261, 262.――His body stolen, i. 99.――His life, ii.
    396――iii. 262. A relation of Alfred, Alfred visited him, was
    advised by him in founding the university of Oxford, his
    remains 263
  Neot’s, St. church, iii. 20. Its windows 363.――Curious painting in,
    ii. 298
  ―――― manor, iii. 260, 261
  ―――― parish, i. 174, 178――ii. 395――iii. 111, 347――iv. 48, 128,
    129.――Alfred’s visit to, iii. 241
  NEOT’S, ST. parish, Hals’s, MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patrons, incumbent, iii. 260.
    Manor of St. Neot 261. By Editor, error in Tonkin’s valuation,
    Lysons on the manors of this parish, manor and advowson united ibid.
    Mr. Grylls restored the church, its situation, St. Guerir, performed
    a miraculous cure on Alfred, St. Neot related to Alfred, his
    singular penance and miraculous powers, Alfred frequently visited
    him, his death 262. Appeared after death to Alfred, led his armies,
    and advised him to found Oxford university, his relics stolen, the
    monastery suppressed after the Conquest, his memory cherished,
    diminutive stature, painted glass preserved for his sake,
    description of the church 263. Windows, voluntary contributions,
    preserved through the Reformation and Civil War, since falling into
    decay till restored by Mr. Grylls, “Hedgeland’s Description, &c.”
    264. Dozmere, marvellous tales relating to it, story of Mr. Tregagle
    condemned to empty it with a limpet shell having a hole bored in it,
    his roaring 265. Etymology of Dozmere, statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 266
  ――――’s, St. an alien priory, iv. 101
  Neotston or Neot’s place, iii. 261
  Nero, the Roman emperor, i. 329――iv. 101
  Nesta, Princess of Wales, i. 34
  Nettlebed manor, iv. 4, 5 _bis_
  Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, iv. 114
  Neustria pillaged by the Normans, ii. 90
  Neville, Richard, Earl of Salisbury, and Margaret his daughter, ii.
    182. Richard Earl of Warwick 38. His cognizance on Fowey church 38.
    Grants the Foy men commissions for privateering 40. His commission
    to punish the Foy pirates 41
  Nevres, St. Dye, Bishop of, ii. 133
  New bridge, i. 138
  ―――― Cambridge, iii. 72
  ―――― Holland, captain Bligh, governor of, iv. 45
  ―――― York, ii. 268
  Newcastle, ii. 28
  ―――― Hollis, Duke of, iii. 147
  Newcome, i. 160
  Newcomen, Mr. of Dartmouth, ii. 83
  Newenham, Devon, Cistercian abbey at, iii. 293
  Newham abbey, Devon, its dissolution, iv. 15
  Newhaven, Charles Cheney, viscount, iii. 458
  Newlan, Newlin or Newlyn parish, ii. 174, 270――iii. 81, 97, 99, 112,
    313, 317, 324, 333, 358――iv. 20.――Vicarage, i. 130
  Newland parish, i. 230, 245, 386, 393
  NEWLIN, or ST. NEWLIN parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, saint, a vicarage, value, patron, tithe
    appropriation, incumbent, manor of Cargol, ruins and prison there,
    Treludra, iii. 267. Humphrey Borlase adhered to King James 2nd,
    Treludra or Borlase Pippin, borough of Mitchell, described by
    Browne Willis, manor 268. Degembris, Palmaunter, Tresilian,
    Treworthen manors 269. Trerice manor 270. By Editor, valuation,
    impropriation, situation and description of church, carved work,
    Arundell vault ibid. Monument to Mr. Pooley, incumbent Mr.
    Polwhele, manor of Cargols, and Treludra, borough of Michell, its
    constitution 271. Remarks upon it, close boroughs in general and
    the Reform Act, Shepherds, Sir C. Hawkins’s lead and silver mine
    272. Mr. John Giddy a memoir of him, his death, quotation from
    Juvenal 273. Manor of Newlyn, story of Sir John Arundell, John for
    the King and his son the first lord of Trerice, the house at
    Trerice, Tresilian improved, statistics 274. Present vicar,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, Trevemper bridge, Black Lime rock, the town
    a village in the parish of Paul 275
  Newlin, by Leland, iv. 265, 286
  Newlyn, James de, iii. 287
  ―――― manor, iii. 274
  ―――― town, iii. 275, 286. Account of 288, 289
  Newnham manor, ii. 318
  Newport borough, ii. 420, 432.――Its history and small extent, iii.
    458. Bought by the Duke of Northumberland 460. Charles Cheyney, M.P.
    for 458
  ―――― town, iii. 461――iv. 51
  Newquay, i. 236. Account of 234, 235
  Newton, Sir Isaac, iii. 174.――His theory of gravitation, &c. ii. 222
  ―――― account of, iii. 161
  ―――― Ferrers, West, iii. 164. Its possessors 165
  Nicene Creed, i. 252
  Nicholas, Mrs. of Looe, i. 286
  ―――― Pope, ii. 354, 356, 365, 384, 394, 398, 411, 412, 414――His
    taxatio Beneficiorum, iii. 5, 7, 41, 44, 46, 56, 106 _bis_, 172,
    228, 232, 238, 257, 261, 270, 276, 278, 291, 400, 453 _bis_――iv. 113
  ―――― 2nd, Pope, i. 110
  ―――― 4th, ―――― iv. 152
  ―――― 5th, ―――― iv. 148
  ―――― St. supposed by Tonkin to be the patron saint of Kellington
    parish, ii. 311. A popular saint, held in high veneration in Russia,
    his history, kept the Roman fasts when an infant 312. His festival
    celebrated by the boy bishop 313.――The patron of infants, iv. 172.
    Of mariners 171. His history 172
  ―――― St. church, Bodmin, belonging to Franciscan friars, great
    dimensions, converted into a house of correction and market place,
    i. 79, and court-house 80. Its font 80. Revenues 83
  ―――― island, iii. 101――iv. 238
  ―――― St. in Scilly, priory and prior, iv. 171
  ―――― Shambles, London, i. 83
  Nicholl of Penrose, Anthony, ii. 384
  Nicholls, i. 74, 305 _bis_――ii. 130.――Frank, M. D. iii. 84. Walter
    16. William 85 _bis_. Mrs. 85. Family 83, 84, 90
  ―――― of Penrose, ii. 153
  ―――― of Trewane, ii. 338. John 335, 339 _quat._ Arms 339
  Nichols, J. and Son, Parliament-street, ii. 295, 296――iii. 45, 120,
    264――iv. 25
  ―――― i. 109, 178, 221.――Family, iii. 243, 343
  ―――― of Trewane, i. 173, 416
  Nicholson, Margaret, i. 134――iv. 45
  Nicolas, Sir Harris, iii. 138
  Nicoll, Anthony, iv. 96. Humphrey 97
  Nietstone, iv. 48
  Nightingale, i. 144
  Nikenor, by Leland, iv. 265
  Nile, battle of, iii. 160
  Nine maids, i. 221. Account of 220.――In Gwendron, ii. 137
  Ninnis, ii. 218
  Niveton, i. 174
  “Noble ingratitude,” iv. 98
  Noles, Mrs. Elizabeth, ii. 84
  Norden, J. i. 341, 350――ii. 336, 414, 417――iii. 75, 360, 361――iv. 41
  Norfolk, iii. 248
  ―――― Thomas Howard, Duke of, iii. 293
  Norman Conquest, ii. 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 126, 129, 151, 155, 165,
    258, 291, 299, 319, 335, 381――iii. 33, 56, 59, 74, 78, 114, 118, 130
    _bis_, 151, 168, 175, 207, 208, 209, 222, 264, 363, 391, 393, 402,
    403, 419, 425, 428, 436, 456――iv. 66, 71 _bis_, 99, 100, 140, 160, 164
  ―――― French, life of Guy Earl of Warwick in, iii. 113
  ―――― magnificence, ii. 423
  Normandy, i. 335 _quat._, 336――ii. 179 _bis_, 202――iv. 103, 144
  ―――― Duke of, iii. 130. Robert and William 462.――Rolle, ii. 344, 347
  Normans, i. 256――iv. 99
  ―――― petition for and obtain letters of marque against Fowey and
    burn it, ii. 39. Pillage Neustria 90. Their castles, the keeps
    spacious 423
  North, Lord, ii. 245. Lord Keeper 255 _bis_. Mr. Tregenna married
    his relation 255
  ―――― hill parish, ii. 230――iii. 37, 43
  Northampton, John, i. 341
  Northcott, i. 108, 111
  Northill, i. 21, 409
  Northmore of Oakhampton, Devon, Mr. iii. 41
  Northumberland, i. 289, 290 _ter._――iv. 42
  ―――― Hugh 1st Duke of, iii. 460 _bis_. Josceline Percy, Earl of 460
  ―――― Ethelfred, King of, ii. 284
  Norton manor, iv. 15
  Norton Rolle manor, ii. 416, 427
  Noseworthy, Edward, ii. 260――iii. 5, 238. William 83.――Francis, iv. 77
  Nosworthy, Edward, i. 36 _bis_. John 36.――Edward, ii. 51, 55 _ter._
    His lawsuit 51. Family 55 _bis_
  ―――― of Truro, Jane, i. 243
  Notitia Monastica, i. 200
  ―――― Parliamentaria, i. 200
  Nottingham, ii. 76
  ―――― castle, ii. 179
  Nowell, Mr. made a fortune at Falmouth, ii. 19.――Michael, of
    Falmouth, iii. 77
  Noy, i. 143 _bis_. Edward 147. Hesther and Humphrey 144. William 144
    _quat._ Attorney-general 147
  Noye, William, Attorney-general, ii. 66, 160. Bought the estate of
    Lanew, Colonel Humphrey his son dispossessed after an expensive
    litigation by the Earl of Bath 333. Sold his title to Davies 334.
    The Editor their descendant and heir at law 339
  ―――― of Pendrea, in Burian, Bridgman, iii. 145, 159, 160. Catherine
    152 _bis_, 159. Edward 145 _bis_, 152 _bis_, 153, 156. His duel 152,
    156. Humphrey 145. Colonel Humphrey 145, 152 _bis_, 153 _quat._,
    156, 159 _bis_, 160. His marriage contract 157. His monument 151.
    Katherine 145. William 145. William, Attorney-general 143, 145, 151,
    152, 161, 342. Memoir of him 143. L’Estrange’s character of him, his
    death, and descendants, entertaining Charles 1st 145. Upheld the
    extreme prerogative 146. Received the thanks of his college, having
    pleaded its cause gratis, with the report from the college register
    155. His picture, a copy presented by the Editor to Exeter college
    156. Anagram on his name 146. His will 152. His works 153. Catalogue
    of them 154. His MSS. in the British Museum 154. His “Reports”, 145,
    154. Family 216.――Arms, i. 361――iii. 145, 151. Crest and motto
    151.――Hester, widow of Humphrey, her petition, iv. 57. Colonel
    Humphrey served Charles 1st 58. William, Attorney-general 57 _bis_,
    58. Family 57
  Nugent, iii. 192.――George Lord, his life of Hampden, ii. 77. His
    account of the quarrel of Eliot and Moyle 78. His memorials of
    Hampden 349.――Lord 349
  Nunn, St. mother of St. David, iii. 292
  Nunn’s, St. pool, method of cure, i. 21
  Nunne, St., day dedicated to, i. 25
  Nuns, Benedictine, i. 73
  Nutcell, St. Boniface, Abbot of, iv. 128
  Nutcombe, Rev. Nutcombe, Chancellor of Exeter, iii. 4
  Nutwell, i. 168, 169
  Nympha bank, iii. 6

  Oak bark, decoction of, preserves fishing nets, ii. 264
  Oakeston, Sir Alexander, ii. 8, 109――iii. 448.――Joan, his widow, ii. 109
  Oakhampton, i. 170. Borough 65
  Oakstone, Sir Alexander, i. 36
  Oate of Peransabulo, i. 348
  Oats, John, iii. 318 _bis_. Thomas 318 _quat._ Mr. and origin of
    name 318
  Observatory, Royal, Mr. Hitchins and his son assistants at, ii. 222, 224
  Ocrinum, ii. 94, 199. Of Ptolemy 174. Promontory supposed to be the
    Lizard 20
  Octa, i. 326
  Octanett family, ii. 341
  Odin, i. 341
  Odo, Mr. ii. 426
  Œdipus Tyrannus, ii. 103
  Ogbere or Ugbere tenement, iv. 41
  Okeford, Devon, Mr. Haden, incumbent of, iii. 19. Rev. James Parkin,
    rector 96
  Oklynton Brygge, iv. 255
  Olea fragrans, iv. 183
  Oliver, Thomas, ii. 189.――Dr. iii. 88. Mr. of Falmouth 159.――Rev.
    Mr. of Zennar, iv. 164
  “Oliver’s Historic Collections,” iii. 372
  Oncomb, Rutland, ii. 89
  Opie, i. 368.――The artist, iii. 88
  ―――― of Ennis, i. 399 _bis_. John and Robert ibid.
  ―――― of Towton, i. 399. Arms ibid.
  Oppie, Thomas, iii. 387
  Orange, Prince of, ii. 112――iii. 216, 297
  Orcett, ii. 340
  Orchard, Charles, iii. 349. Family 415, 416. Paul 413, 414, 416
  ―――― of Alderscombe, ii. 347. Memorials in church 347
  ―――― of Hartland Abbey, Paul, ii. 347
  ―――― of Orcott family, and Charles, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 343
  ―――― Mauvais, East, manor, iv. 136
  Orcot, account of, ii. 343
  Ordgar, Duke of Devon, iv. 6.――Earl of Devonshire, iii. 384, 460
  Ordnance, Mr. Call’s improvements in, iv. 11
  Ordulf, Earl of Devonshire, iii. 385
  Orestes, iii. 265
  Orford, George Walpole, Earl of, iii. 230 _bis_
  Origen, i. 193, 388
  Orleans, Duke of, Regent of France, purchases the Pitt Diamond, i.
    68. Wears it in his hat 69
  Ornithologum longibracteatum, iv. 182
  Orosius, ii. 237
  Osbaldeston, Miss, ii. 34
  Osbert, i. 383.――Mr. iv. 44, 46
  Osborne family, iv. 173
  Osca, a town in Spain, i. 88
  Oseney Abbey, iii. 241
  Osmunda Regalis, iv. 181
  Osraig clan, iii. 331
  Osseney North, near Oxford, iv. 5
  Ossian, ii. 405. His poems 406
  Ossory, Bishop and Archdeacon of, iv. 146 _bis_
  ―――― county, ii. 94――iii. 331
  Ossuna, Don Diego, Bishop of, i. 311
  Oswald, St. iii. 33
  Otaheite, discovery of, i. 359――iii. 405
  Otham or Othram manor, iii. 276
  Other half stone, i. 178 _bis_, 180, 182 _bis_, 183
  Othonna pectinata, iv. 182
  Otterham parish, ii. 86 _bis_, 232, 273 _bis_――iii. 22――iv. 61, 125, 127
  OTTERHAM parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 275.
    Value, ancient name, a rectory, patron and incumbent 276. Editor,
    manor, church, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase ibid.
  Ottery St. Mary, i. 394
  Ottomans destroyed the wall of Constantinople, ii. 366
  Oughtred, Sir Anthony, defeats the French fleet, ii. 171
  Ovid, passage from, i. 189.――Notes on, iv. 87
  Owen, G. W., iv. 60, 276
  Oxalis, iv. 182
  Oxenham of Oxenham in Devon, iv. 25
  Oxford, i. 84, 247――ii. 60, 65, 138, 139, 221, 241, 389――iii. 52,
    160, 329――iv. 14.――Bath stone brought to, i. 58.――Arms of, and
    tradition connected with them, ii. 404
  ―――― near Sevenoaks, iv. 87
  ―――― county, iii. 156
  ―――― Earl of, John de Vere, i. 262, 402. Richard de Vere 262,
    263.――Aubrey last of the De Veres, ii. 395. John 12th Earl 181
    _bis_. John 13th Earl 182, 183 _bis_, 184. John 14th Earl 185.
    Richard 11th Earl 181. Richard 395.――Richard de Vere 11th Earl, iii. 65
  ―――― press, iii. 123.――Delegates from, ii. 266
  ―――― University, ii. 147, 233, 266――iii. 72, 155, 163, 221, 239, 300
    _bis_, 336 _bis_, 344, 352――iv. 69, 144, 145.――Founded, iii.
    264.――J.P. Rigaud, Professor of Astronomy at, ii. 376
  ―――― verses, ii. 348
  Oxnam, Richard, iii. 89
  Oysters poisoned by the copper, iii. 212

  Pabenham, John de, i. 370
  Pacific Ocean, coral reefs in, iii. 108
  Padestock, iii. 324
  Paddistow, by Leland, iv. 284
  Padestow, by Leland, iv. 260
  Padstow church, i. 74.――Font in, iii. 178
  ―――― harbour, ii. 253――iii. 236, 382, 423
  ―――― haven, i. 372, 373 _bis_, 376 _bis_, 381
  ―――― parish, i. 377――ii. 79, 256 _bis_, 299――iii. 175, 334 _bis_,
    435.――Rev. William Rawlings, rector, ii. 400.――Etymology, iii. 176
  PADSTOW parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Leland’s
    account of the town, privileges derived from Athelstan, ancient
    names, value of benefice, St. Petroc born there, Fuller and
    Collier upon St. Petroc, church a vicarage, value, iii. 277.
    Patron, incumbent 278. Editor, named from St. Petroc, value of
    benefice, Whitaker’s conjecture that Mr. Prideaux lived on the
    site of St. Petroc’s monastery, character of him ibid. Carew’s
    account of the house, its erection and improvements, church 279.
    Prideaux monuments, town not large, harbour inconvenient,
    prospects of its improvement, Mr. William Rawlins brought a
    considerable trade, tithes split, several chapels, St. Sampson’s
    280. Account of St. Sampson, a beautiful walk, St. Saviour’s
    chapel, origin of that name, domestic tragedy contained in a black
    letter pamphlet, trigonometrical survey, Stepper point 281. Time
    of high water, statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase, slate at
    Dinah’s Cave and Rock Ferry 282. Singular crystalline rock,
    Penniscen bay, Yealm bridge in Werrington 283
  ―――― rock, i. 74, 94
  ―――― town, iii. 331
  Pagan army employed by the Christian Emperor of Rome, ii. 75
  ―――― inhabitants of Cornwall converted, iii. 304
  Pagans, iii. 285
  Page, i. 263
  Paget, Rev. Mr. of St. Mewan, iii. 196.――Rev. Simon of Truro, iv. 76
  Pagett, Rev. Mr. of Truro, iv. 71
  Painter, i. 344――ii. 316
  ―――― of Antrim, i. 351
  ―――― of Trelisick, ii. 99
  Paldys tin mine, ii. 131
  Paleolagi of Montferrat, ii. 369 _bis_
  Paleolagus dynasty, account of, ii. 366. Andronicus 1st and 2nd,
    John 1st and 2nd, quarrels of Theodore, Constantine, Demetrius, and
    Thomas, death of John 2nd, death of Andronicus, Demetrius possessed
    Silybria and aspired to the throne 366. Thomas supported
    Constantine, dissensions of Demetrius and Thomas, Mohammed’s
    advantages therefrom, death of Constantine 367. Thomas retires on
    the taking of Constantinople, Demetrius submits, his death and
    account of his two sons, Thomas’s pension from the pope, Gibbon’s
    contemptuous account of the family fate 368. Refuted 369
  Paleolagus, Andrew, son of Demetrius, ii. 368. Andronicus 366.
    Camilio 365. Camillo 369, 370 _bis_. Constantine 366 _bis_, 369.
    Eighth of that name, and last Emperor 365. Demetrius 366 _bis_.
    Dorothy 365. Daughter of Theodore 374. Her marriage and death 375.
    Emmanuel 366 _bis_. Ferdinando 365, 369. Son of Theodore 374. Lost
    sight of 375. Isidore, a monk 366. John 365 _bis_, 369, 370. Third
    son of Demetrius 369. John 2nd 370. Son of Theodore 374. Lost sight
    of 375. Manuel son of Demetrius 368. Maria 365. Daughter of Theodore
    374. Died unmarried 375. Martha, wife of Theodore, jun. 375. Michael
    366. Prosper 365, 369 _bis_. Theodore 365 _bis_, 366 _bis_, 369,
    375. His life by Mr. Arundell 365. Birth, parentage, reasons for
    leaving Italy 370. In England, and married in 1615, register of his
    marriage imperfect, his issue, did not settle at Landulph before
    1622 with his family 372. Connected with the Arundell or Lower
    family, probably lived at Clifton with Sir Nicholas Lower, his death
    373. Burial, discrepancy of dates, vault and coffin opened,
    appearance of the body 374. His monument, its inscription, arms 365.
    Account of his issue 374. Theodore son of Theodore 374. Died at sea
    375. Thomas 365, 366 _bis_, 369, 370. His character from
    Khalcondylas by Recaut, and by Mahomet 368.――Constantine, iv. 148
  Palestine, i. 130, 411――iii. 129.――Guy, Earl of Warwick’s journey
    to, iv. 113
  Palfer castle, Normandy, iv. 141
  Pallamaunter of Palamaunter family, iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Pallamonter, i. 247
  Pallas, i. 183
  Pallephant, i. 159
  Palmer, Roger, Earl of Castlemaine, ii. 11. Rev. Mr. refused to
    subscribe the Act of Uniformity 220. His prophecy 221
  Palmerias, Matthias, iv. 148
  Pancras, St. Truro church dedicated to, iv. 8
  ―――― church, London, iii. 148
  ―――― street, Truro, iv. 76 _bis_, 80, 81
  Panicum dactylon, iv. 180
  Par, near St. Austell, ii. 18
  Paraguay, ii. 290
  Parc, i. 52
  Paris, iv. 145.――Council of, ii. 90. St. Sampson’s remains removed
    to 90
  ―――― Dr. i. 150, 151. William de 83.――Dr. instituted the Geological
    Society of Cornwall, iii. 95. His works 97. His life of Sir Humphrey
    Davy 95
  Parishes, number of in Cornwall, iv. 166
  Park, i. 367, 369. Account of 205
  Park of Park, i. 207
  ―――― Erisey, iii. 383
  Parke, by Leland, iv. 258
  Parker, i. 61 _ter._ Francis and Sir John 302. Sir Nicholas 125,
    136. Arms 136.――Rev. James, iii. 96
  ―――― of Burrington, Sir Nicholas, Governor of Pendennis castle, his
    arms and character, ii. 12. Death, and burial in Budock church 13
  ―――― of Rathow, arms, ii. 12, 130
  Parkinge family, iv. 138. Heir of 139
  Parkings, Francis, family and arms, iv. 140
  Parliament, memoirs of, ii. 277. Commons House of 38. Camelford
    sends members to 403, 404. Launceston sent two members to 432.
    Favoured Mr. Peters, iii. 73
  Parliament army injured Leskeard, iii. 26. Defeated 17
  ―――― Roll, ii. 170
  Parliament street, Westminster, ii. 295
  ―――― wars, iii. 73
  ―――― writ to Truro, iv. 74
  Parmenter, Mr. of Ilfracombe, iii. 343
  Parr, Queen Catherine, i. 16. Thomas 24
  Parsons, John, iii. 260
  Partridge, Cornish for, i. 243, 244, 245
  Pascentius, i. 326
  Pascoe, Captain, ii. 318. Rev. Mr. 329, 330.――Erasmus, iii. 343.
    Thomas 89. Family 83
  Pashley family, ii. 395
  Passiflora cærulea racemosa, iv. 182
  Passio Christi, an ancient MS. in Cornish, observations upon, App.
    5, iv. 190
  Patagonia, Admiral Byron wrecked on the coast of, iii. 205
  Patefond, William de, i. 246
  Paternus, St. i. 321.――His history, iii. 336
  Patras, a city of Achaia, ii. 367, 369
  Patrick, i. 295.――Mr. iv. 33 _bis_
  ―――― St. i. 250――iii. 331 _bis_, 431.――Cleared all Ireland at once
    of serpents, ii. 298. His meeting with St. German 65
  Patrick’s, St. church, Dublin, iv. 138, 147
  Patten, Miss, iii. 279
  Paul, the Apostle, iii. 284 _bis_.――St. i. 108, 122 _ter._, 198,
    206――ii. 53. His conversion 112
  ―――― Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― parish, ii. 174――iii. 78, 79, 84, 275. Church burnt by the
    Spaniards 91
  PAUL parish, Hals lost. Tonkin, situation, boundaries, iii. 283. St.
    Paulinus, Archbishop of York, memoir of, a vicarage, value of
    benefice, patron, impropriator, incumbent, earlier value 284.
    Editor, parish has not the prefix of St. ibid. Notice of St. Paul
    de Leon, parish feast, attached to Hailes abbey, dedication of
    that abbey by Richard, King of the Romans, relic presented to it
    by his son 285. Its value and history, church and monuments,
    Mousehole town 286. Destroyed by the Spaniards, the church burnt,
    register of the event, Spanish ball preserved, chapel at
    Mousehole, and on St. Clement’s island 287. Change of name from
    Porth Enys, Newlyn, Keigwin family, Godolphins at Treworveneth,
    Trungle 288. Chiowne and the Chinese wall, view from above Newlyn,
    new road, monument to commemorate the finding of a ring 289.
    Curious British ornaments, other similar ones, supposed to have
    been worn by the Druids, statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 290
  Paul pier, iv. 23
  ―――― St. de Leon, notice of, iii. 285.――Name explained, iv. 313
  Paul’s, St. cathedral, London, iii. 167
  ―――― St. church, Covent Garden, iii. 252
  Paulet, Sir John, ii. 363.――Henry, last Duke of Bolton, iii. 47.
    Family 47, 123
  Paulin parish, iii. 425
  Paulinus, Bishop of Rochester, and first Archbishop of York, iii.
    284 _bis_, 285. His history 284
  Paulet, ii. 292
  Pawley, Jane, account of, iii. 8. Family 8 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 74
  Pawton, ii. 362――iii. 175 _bis_
  Paxton, Richard, i. 283
  Payne, John, of St. Ives, ii. 192. John, mayor of St. Ives, his arms 198
  Paynter, i. 359, 360. Rev. C. H., 251. Francis 145, 148 _bis_. John
    348. William 145.――Rev. Thomas, ii. 142. Miss 300. Family 228,
    270.――Mr. iii. 441. Family 445
  ―――― of Boskenna, Francis, i. 359
  ―――― of St. Erth, i. 423
  ―――― of Trelisick, i. 145. Arthur 348, 350. Francis 349, 350 _bis_,
    351, 359. James 350, 359. Mary 359. William 350. Arms 349, 350
  Paynter’s Consultation, i. 148
  Payton, i. 405
  Peace and taxes, commissioners for, John Rame, iv. 129. John Robins 117
  Pearce, James, i. 112.――Family, iii. 60, 83.――Nicholas _ter._ iv. 3.
    Rev. Mr. of Tywardreth 109. Rev. Mr. of Broadoak 185
  Pearce of Penryn, Mr. and Miss, iii. 445
  Pears, John, iii. 6
  Pearse, Rev. Thomas, ii. 92.――Mr. and Miss, iii. 9
  ―――― of Helaton, Thomas, i. 303, 304 _bis_
  Peck, ii. 428
  Peckwater hall, iii. 155
  Pedenandre mine, iii. 382
  Pederick, Little, church, i. 74
  ―――― Little, parish, i. 404
  Pederwin, Pedyrwyn, or St. Pederwin parish, i. 37――iii. 457――iv. 69
  ―――― north, parish 336; or Pedyrwyn, i. 107――iv. 59, 131
  ―――― south, iii. 335; or Pederwyn, ii. 398, 417.――Pedyrwin, or
    Petherwin, iv. 50, 51, 52, 68, 69 _bis_
  Pedyr hundred, i. 230, 245――ii. 253 _bis_――iii. 175
  ―――― St. chapel at Treloye, i. 231
  ―――― St. priory at Bodman, iv. 160
  Pedyrick, Little, parish, ii. 253, 256
  Peel, Sir Robert, ii. 112
  Pegwill church, iii. 349
  Pelagianism, ii. 65. St. Dye opposed to 131
  Pelagians, ii. 63. Of Britain 73
  Pelagius, i. 305――ii. 72, 74. A Briton 63. His doctrines 72. Council
    at St. Albans to consider them, St. German preached against him 64.
    His doctrine contrary to the law and prophets, Britons convinced of
    his errors 65
  ―――― first pope, ii. 90
  ―――― second pope, i. 393
  Pelham, Bishop, iii. 275
  Pellew, Admiral, iii. 96.――Cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18.――Family,
    iii. 94
  Pelniddon, account of by Tonkin, i. 47
  Peloponnesus, ii. 366
  Pelsew, i. 393, 403. Account of 402, 417
  Pelton, i. 116 _bis_
  Pelvellan described, iv. 37
  Pelyn house described, and summer house at, ii. 391
  Pelynt manor, iii. 293
  ―――― parish, ii. 394, 398――iii. 39, 170――iv. 19, 23
  PELYNT parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, ancient name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation, manor of Plynt, iii. 291. By the Editor, ancient
    name ibid. Church spacious, monuments, burial-place of St. Juncus,
    Whitaker says the parish is dedicated to St. Nunn, St. David
    distinguished his followers by a leek 292. Church belonged to
    Newenham Abbey, value, Pelynt manor, Hale Barton and ancient
    remains upon it, Trelawn, its history by Bond 293, and that of its
    possessors, three generations of the Grey family annihilated by
    the civil wars, Trelawny family 294. Henry 5th’s partiality for
    Sir John, lines on Launceston gate, Cornish saying of the
    Godolphins, Trelawnys and Glanvilles, Lord Bonville built the
    house, rebuilt by Sir John Trelawny, and after a fire by Edward
    Trelawny, family portraits, chapel built by Bishop Trelawny 295.
    His history, the seven bishops committed to the Tower by James II.
    tried, and acquitted 296. Bishop Trelawny’s part in the
    Revolution, observation on the Duke of Marlborough, the bishop’s
    popularity in Cornwall 297. Cornwall disposed to rise in arms on
    his imprisonment, song upon it, universally sung at the time 298.
    Names of the seven bishops, statue of Cardinal Wolsey at Christ
    Church, Oxford, erected by Trelawny, his son Edward, governor of
    Jamaica, his judicious conduct there 299. History and fanaticism
    of Sir Harry Trelawny 300. Turned papist, priests arrived from
    Italy to celebrate masses for his soul, parish, statistics 301.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 302
  ―――― Church town, iv. 32 _ter._
  ―――― vicarage, iv. 29
  Pembre, Henry de la, ii. 119
  Pembro, by Leland, iv. 267
  Pembroke college, Oxford, ii. 233, 286, 287, 377――iii. 87, 88, 251
  ―――― Jasper, Earl of, ii. 182
  Pembrokeshire, ii. 173
  Pen, word explained, iv. 317
  ―――― Uchel Coit, iii. 25
  Penalmick barton, iv. 2, 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2
  ―――― of Penalmick family, iv. 2
  Penaluna family, iii. 61
  Penare, account of, i. 204
  Penarth, i. 240.――Walter, iv. 77
  Pencair, by Leland, iv. 264
  Pencaranowe, iii. 326 _ter._, 327, 328
  Pencarow, i. 368. Account of 374
  ―――― of Pencarow, i. 369
  ―――― village, i. 3
  Pencoil, account of, ii. 89
  ―――― John de, ii. 89
  Pencoll, i. 387
  Pencoose, account of, i. 391
  Penda, King of the Mercians, ii. 284――iii. 284――iv. 125
  Pendanlase, iii. 431
  Pendarves, account of, i. 160, 163
  ―――― i. 135, 213, 302. Thomas 273, 276. Rev. Mr. 224.――Alexander,
    ii. 93. Peter 143. Samuel 93. Miss 300. Mr. 114. Arms 93.――Edward W.
    W., iii. 367. Henry 284. Rev. Henry and Margaret 84. Sir William
    382. Family 148 _bis_, 286, 343, 382.――Mr. iv. 2
  ―――― of Pendarves, i. 160, 163, 400, 401. E. W. W. 163, 164, 401,
    403. Rev. Thomas 161. William 160. Sir William 160, 163. Arms
    161.――Family and Miss, ii. 93
  ―――― of Roscrow, Mary, i. 137.――Alexander, his character, Rev. John,
    Mary, ii. 98. Miss 235, 239. Arms 98.――Samuel, iii. 303. Family 133.
    Mrs. Bassett their heir 303.――Family, iv. 107
  Pendeen, Dr. Borlase born at, iii. 51
  ―――― cove, ii. 290
  Pendene, account of, by Hals, ii. 282. By the Editor 284
  Pendenis castle, iv. 116; or Pendennis, iii. 136, 183, 217, 274. Sir
    N. Slanning, governor of 75
  Pendennis, the former name of St. Ives parish, etymology, island,
    old fortification, and chapel upon, ii. 258
  ―――― castle, i. 104, 105, 268――ii. 1 _bis_, 5, 6, 17, 280. Falmouth
    built for its supply 9. Situation, rent to the crown, etymology,
    description, extent, repaired by Henry VIII. and Queen Elizabeth,
    has contained above 100 cannon, and some thousands of foot arms,
    Sir Nicholas Parker appointed governor 12. Succeeded by Sir
    Nicholas Hals, who was succeeded by Sir Nicholas Slanning, and he
    by John Arundell, siege under him by the rebels, dreadful
    extremities, and surrender of the garrison, the last castle in the
    kingdom to yield, except Ragland in Wales 13. Soldiers killed by
    eating too freely, Col. Fortescue succeeded to the command, and
    after him Capt. Fox, who was succeeded on the restoration by Lord
    Arundell, and he by the Earl of Bath 14. The Killigrews lords of
    the land 17. Not Ictis 20. Its longitude 23. Rev. W. Jackman,
    chaplain 31. Governor and officers salaried by the crown 278
  Pender of Penzance, i. 148
  Pendew, account of, i. 324
  Pendinant, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pendinas and its pharos, by Leland, iv. 268
  Pendor, i. 148
  Pendower beach, iv. 123
  Pendragon, etymology, i. 326
  Pendre, i. 143. John, and arms 143
  Pendrea, i. 143 _bis_, 147――ii. 125.――In St. Burian,
    attorney-general Noye, born at, iii. 152
  ―――― Mr. iii. 16
  Pendrym manor, iii. 123
  Penferm, Matthew, iv. 3
  Penfon manor, ii. 232 _bis_――iii. 352
  Penfoune, iii. 352
  ―――― of Penfoune family, iii. 352
  Penfusis, by Leland, iv. 271
  Pengaer, iii. 225
  Pengally, i. 61
  Pengarswick, account of, i. 124
  Pengelly, i. 119 _bis_, 127――ii. 89
  Pengover, iii. 173
  Pengreap, ii. 133
  Penhale, i. 380, 387, 388.――In Egloskerry, iii. 137
  Penhall manor, iii. 313
  Penhallam, ii. 233
  Penhallinyk, ii. 140
  Penhallow, iii. 193
  ―――― Miss, iii. 421
  Penhalluwick, William, ii. 160
  Penhargard manor, ii. 153
  Penheale, i. 378. Account of 379
  Penhele in Egloskerry manor, iv. 60
  Penhell tenement, iii. 209
  Penhellick, account of, i. 207, 208
  ―――― Rev. Mr. ii. 118
  Penitentiaries, i. 232
  Penkevil of Penkevil family, iii. 214
  Penkevill, iii. 454. Tenement 209, 210. Account of 214
  Penkivell manor, iii. 182, 208
  ―――― arms, i. 297.――Family, ii. 336
  ―――― of Pensiquillis family, and Benjamin, i. 420
  ―――― of Ressuna, Richard, i. 297
  ―――― of Trematon, i. 297
  ―――― St. Michael, parish, i. 116
  Penknek, by Leland, iv. 277
  Penkridge, deanery of, in Herts, held by Tregony Archbishop of
    Dublin, iv. 144
  Penkwek, iii. 26, 27
  Penlee point, iii. 375
  Penleton bridge, i. 119
  Penlyer, Mr. 296
  Penmear manor, iii. 239
  Penn, Captain, ii. 25――iii. 85
  Pennalerick, Miss, iii. 62
  Pennalyky, William, iii. 324
  Pennance, account of, i. 257
  Pennans, account of, i. 255
  Pennant, i. 178 _bis_, 184. Account of 383
  Penneck family, ii. 217, 218. Origin 217. Anne, Catherine and
    Charles 218. Rev. John 217. Father and son 123, 218. Family
    monuments 219
  Pennington, i. 304
  Penniscen, iii. 283
  Pennock, ii. 170
  Pennore or Penarth, account of, ii. 113
  Pennycumquick, houses at Falmouth so called, story of the name, the
    same by Mr. Wynn, ii. 20
  Penpell, i. 243
  Penpoll, i. 247――iii. 343 _bis_, in St. Germans and Quethiock 359
  Penpons, account of, ii. 336
  ―――― of Penpons, ii. 335
  Penqueen, i. 118
  Penquite, ii. 91
  Penrey, iii. 305
  Penrice, i. 43, 47. Etymology 43
  Penrin, Mr. ii. 97
  Penrine, by Leland, iv. 271
  Penrith, ii. 76
  Penros, account of, iii. 429
  Penrose, i. 132, 346, 386――iv. 97
  ―――― ii. 157. Rev. John, his character 104. Martha 30, 32. Captain
    Thomas, his history 25. Journal 26, 27, 28, presented with a medal
    by the King of Sweden 27. His scuffle with Cornish seamen 29. Trial,
    conviction, pardon, death, and issue 30.――John and Richard, iii.
    324. William 324 _bis_. Mr. 112.――Admiral C. V. iv. 158. Notice of
    158, 159
  ―――― of Lefeock, Martha and Thomas, iii. 186
  ―――― of Nance in St. Martin’s in Kerrier, iii. 188
  ―――― of Penrose, Edward, and Richard, iii. 444. Miss 9 _bis_, 444,
    445. Mr. 442, 443. His house and hospitality 443. Family 443, 445.
    Arms 443
  ―――― of Tregethes, i. 364
  ―――― manor, iii. 445. Account of 443. Possessors 445
  Penryn, meaning of, iii. 327
  ―――― borough, account of, ii. 94. Corporation 8, 9. Members for, F.
    Basset 243. Sir William Lemon 229. Richard Penwarne 75
  ―――― hundred, ii. 51, 92
  ―――― manor, i. 231――iii. 2 _bis_, 226.――Bishop of Exeter, Lord of,
    ii. 51
  ―――― parish, i. 138, 242, 379
  ―――― river, iii. 231
  ―――― town, ii. 2, 17, 69, 96, 100, 113, 140, 215――iii. 62,
    64.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. United with Falmouth
    99.――Road from Helston to, iii. 63
  Penryn Penwid, iii. 431
  Pensandes, by Leland, iv. 265
  Pensants, by Leland, iv. 286
  Pensiquillis, account of, i. 420
  Penstruan, account of, i. 421
  Pentavale Fenton, iii. 394. Its etymology 395
  Pentavall, ii. 1
  Penter’s cross village, iii. 346
  Pentewan, account of by Hals, i. 41
  ―――― manor, iii. 190
  ―――― quarry, iv. 104.――By Editor, i. 50. Streamworks 51
  ―――― stone, iv. 104
  Pentillie, account of, iii. 163. Fine house built there 166
  ―――― castle, account of, iii. 346. Church aisle belonging to 346
  Pentilly, i. 316. Account of 314
  Pentine, Avice and Richard, ii. 398
  Pentire of Pentire family and heiress, iii. 193
  ―――― of Pentire in Minvor and of Pentewan in Mevagissey, Jane, iii.
    314 _bis_. Philip and family 314
  ―――― of Petuan, i. 384
  ―――― point, i. 381――iii. 240, 281. Its latitude and longitude 281
  Pentnar, i. 419
  Pentowen, by Leland, iv. 275
  Pentuan, i. 49
  ―――― manor, possessors of, iii. 193
  Pentwan, account of, by Tonkin, i. 47
  ―――― Lower, described, i. 47
  Pentybers Rok, iv. 238
  Penuans, i. 234
  Penularick, Miss, iii. 60
  Penvose head, iv. 94
  Penwarne, i. 236
  ―――― in Mawnan, i. 46――iii. 74 _bis_. Account of 75, 76. Sold 77
  ―――― in Mevagissey manor, iii. 192. Its possessors 191, 193
  ―――― i. 255.――Richard, ii. 9. He procured copies of the letters of
    Sir Nicholas Hals 10.――Richard, iii. 324, 325
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mawnan, John _bis_ iii. 77. Peter 76. His death
    77. Richard 75, 325. Robert, _bis_, 75. Robert and Thomas 77. Family
    75, 193. Arms 75, 77
  ―――― of Penwarne in Mevagissey, Vivian, iii. 193. The heir, and
    family 191
  Penwerris, i. 137
  Penwinnick manor, iii. 382
  Penwith hundred, i. 160, 228, 261, 344――ii. 118 _bis_, 141, 145,
    146, 169, 214, 234, 257, 269, 272, 282, 358――iii. 5, 30, 46, 78,
    140, 242, 283, 306, 339, 380, 381, 425 _bis_, 428――iv. 52, 53
    _bis_, 164 _bis_, 377.――Stone circles in, i. 141
  Penwortha manor, iii. 314, 315. Account of 314
  ―――― village, iii. 314 _bis_
  Penwyne, account of, iii. 66
  Penycuick, near Edinburgh, ii. 20
  Penydarran on the Taff, ii. 20
  Penzance, name explained, iv. 316
  ―――― borough, corporation of, iii. 90
  ―――― manor, iii. 91
  ―――― market, iii. 385
  ―――― town, i. 149――ii. 82, 120, 124 _bis_, 174, 214, 215 _bis_, 216,
    266, 287, 352――iii. 34, 55, 78, 275, 286, 287, 290, 342, 375――iv.
    166.――Account of, iii. 81, 83, 91.――London newspapers at and post
    to, i. 59.――Burnt, rebuilt, incorporated, its jurisdiction, a
    coinage town, its market, fairs, it favoured the royalists, and
    was sacked by the parliament army, iii. 81. Custom house, arms,
    and form of writ 82. Dr. Borlase educated at 51.――Exceeds Truro in
    beauty and in trade, iv. 85. Mr. Thompson died at 109
  Peran Arwothan, ii. 92
  ―――― Uthno, ii. 169
  ―――― well, ii. 2, 129
  Peransabulo, i. 289
  Peransand, i. 198――ii. 93, 173, 315, 317
  ―――― church, iii. 176
  Peranwell parish, iv. 1
  Perceval, Mrs. i. 163, 400
  Percivall, John, married Thomasine Bonaventure, lord mayor, and
    knighted, his death, iv. 134
  Perer, Richard, ii. 209
  Pereth, ii. 76
  Perin in Cornwall, news from, ii. 100
  Perkin, Mr. iii. 87 _bis_
  ―――― Warbeck took sanctuary at Beaulieu abbey, ii. 329
  Pernall, John, iv. 77
  Perr river, i. 44, 45
  Perran cove, iii. 309
  ―――― St. ii. 113――iii. 304, 309.――Visits St. Keverne, ii. 324.――His
    estimation, the supposed discoverer of tin, iii. 330. His history
    331, 332. His miracles 313. His great age, his shrine and banner
    332. His day 311
  ――――’s St. chapel or oratory, account of, iii. 329
  ――――’s St. college in Keverne, iii. 332
  ―――― Arworthall church, iii. 304
  PERRAN ARWORTHALL parish, or ST. PIRAN ARWORTHALL, in Kerrier.
    Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, manor of Arworthall, iii.
    302. Quantities of tin upon it, chalybeate spring, Renaudin family
    303. By the Editor, saint, church, Perran Well village, change of
    road, smelting-house, extensive use of arsenic, its sublimation from
    ores 304. Ironworks of Messrs. Fox, beautiful valley, impropriation,
    advowson, statistics 305. Geology by Dr. Boase 306
  ―――― Arworthall, St. parish, iii. 224. In Kerrier 328
  ―――― Arworthall village, iii. 303
  ―――― Uthno manor, iii. 311
  PERRAN UTHNO parish, or LITTLE PERRAN. Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii.
    306. Manor of Uthno 307. By Editor, church, its situation, memorial
    to Mr. Davies, the oath of deans rural ibid. Oracular well, emptied
    by a mine, good farmhouses, Goldsithney village, its chapel 308.
    Image of St. Perran or St. James, fair, transferred here from
    Sithney, displaying of a glove at fairs, destruction of the Lionesse
    country, and cove where Trevelyan was borne on shore 309. High tide
    in 1099, noticed by Stow, the Godwyn sands, Editor’s opinion of the
    tale, attempt to restore the land by incantation 310. Acton castle,
    Cudden point, view from it, children go there to seek a silver
    table, manor of Uthno, and of Lan Uthno, in St. Erth, feast,
    statistics 311. Population increased in consequence of mining and
    agriculture, Chapel an Crouse, bowling green, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 312
  Perran well, or St. Perran’s well, iii. 303, 304. Curious account of
    308. Its virtues 329
  ―――― well village, situation, iii. 304
  ―――― Zabuloe parish, iii. 304, 386
  PERRAN ZABULOE, PERANSAND, or PERRAN IN THE SANDS. Hals’s MS. lost.
    By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation and boundaries, iii. 312.
    Ridiculous legend of St. Perran, his great age, patron of the
    tinners, tales told of him, fair, value of the benefice, patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Penhall and Halwyn, of
    Tywarnhaile, and of Tywarnhaile Tiers 313. Tywarnhaile house,
    Chapel Angarder, Penwortha manor, tin and lead upon it, Lambourne
    Wigan 314. Its history 315. Manor of Lambourn, its history 316.
    Creeg Mear, urns in it, conjectures respecting it 319. Castle
    Kaerkief, Whitaker’s opinion of it 320. Callestock Veor village,
    other entrenchments of no importance 321. Other two, Tresawsen, or
    Bosawson, the three barrows and four barrows, chapel in
    Callestock, Fenton Berram, manor of Fenton Gymps 322.
    Marghessen-foos village, practice of maids coming to market to
    offer themselves for hire, etymology of Marghessen-foos 323. Roman
    roads, Fenton Gymps family 324. Chywarton, Callestock-Ruol 325.
    Trevellance or Pencaranowe manor, its history, Reenwartha 326.
    Reen Wollas, Melingybridge 327. Manor of St. Piran, some tin on
    it, account of Piran round 328. By Editor, etymology ibid.
    Description of Piran round, the Guary Mir, “the Creation of the
    World,” and “Mount Calvary,” published by the Editor, St. Piran’s
    well supposed to cure diseases, encroachments of the sand,
    discovery and description of a chapel supposed to be St. Perran’s
    oratory 329. Defaced for relics, St. Perran esteemed the patron of
    all Cornwall, his day celebrated with great hilarity, a Perraner,
    St. Chiwidden, Dr. Butler’s Lives of the Saints 330. His history
    of St. Perran or St. Kiaran, went to Rome, was of the clan Osraig,
    died in Cornwall 331. Probably an active missionary, his banner
    the standard of Cornwall, his shrine, impropriation of tithes,
    incumbent 332. Chiverton, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 333
  Perranbonse cove, ii. 360
  Perraner, iii. 330
  Perre, Thomas, iii. 387
  Perrin, Provost of Taunton, i. 86
  Perron, St. Arworthal, ii. 17
  Perry, i. 236
  Persia, iii. 187
  Persius, iv. 87
  Perthcolumb, account of, i. 364
  Perthcothen, iii. 177
  Perthsasnac, ii. 165
  Perthtowan, ii. 250
  Perwennack, i. 11
  Pesaro in Italy, ii. 369, 370, 371, 373. Theodore Paleolagus of 365
  Pesseme, Patrick, ii. 160
  Peter, Rev. John, ii. 117
  ―――― of Harlyn, Francis, iii. 176, 177. Gregory 175, 176 _bis_. John
    76, 166, 176 _bis_. William 176 _bis_, 178 _bis_, 333. Mr. 178. Mr.
    erected a pier 179. Family 177
  ―――― of Porthcuthan, or Perthcothen. Mr. iii. 177. Family 162
  ―――― of Treater, John, ii. 336.――In Padstow, Thomas, iii. 176 _bis_
  ―――― of Trenaran in Padstow, John, iii. 176 _ter._ Arms 176
  ―――― St. i. 197, 198 _bis_――ii. 127.――Younger brother of St. Andrew,
    iv. 100
  Peter’s spring, iii. 72
  ―――― St. church, Rome, iv. 165
  Peterborough, Thomas White, bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Peters, i. 382. Hugh 420. Mr. 296.――Rev. Mr. ii. 218.――Rev. Charles
    of St. Maben, his learning and character, iii. 67, 68. His
    biography, his ancestor a royalist 67. Dined his poor parishioners,
    his controversy with Warburton, extracts from his meditations 68.
    Elizabeth 72. Rev. Hugh 67, 71, 72. His biography 72. Rev. Jonathan,
    of St. Clement’s, Dr. Joseph, of Truro 68. Rev. Thomas and William
    71. Biographical notice of 72
  Petersfield parish, iii. 206
  PETHERICK, LITTLE, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, ancient
    name, iii. 334. By the Editor, present patron, church, and church
    town, Tregonnen village, St. Ida’s chapel ibid. Account of St. Ida,
    her husband a favourite of Charlemagne, another chapel on Trevelian
    farm, former name of the parish, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 335
  Petherick, Little, parish, iii. 277
  Petherwin, North, i. 377
  PETHERWIN, OR PEDERWIN, SOUTH, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, iii. 335. St. Peternus, three
    days dedicated to him, value of benefice, impropriation 336. By the
    Editor, church, its monuments and situation ib. Annual fairs,
    Trecroogo, Tregallen and Trethevy villages, Trebersey, Mr. Gedy an
    ancestor of the Editor, Tresmarrow, Tremeal 337. Death of Mrs.
    Archer, an epitaph, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 338
  Petnell, St. or Petronel, iv. 153 _bis_
  Petre, Sir John, obtained church lands, was ancestor of Lord Petre,
    founded eight fellowships at Oxford, iii. 155. Sir John 293. Sir
    William 155. Lord Petre of Exeter, now of Essex 176
  ―――― of Torbryan, Devon, John, iii. 155
  Petroc, St. iii. 277, 278 _bis_. His life 227. His history, i. 95.
    His body stolen 98
  ―――― St. church, iii. 408. Bodmin 277. The Cornish see 415. This
    is disputed by Mr. Whitaker 408. proved by extracts from a register
    kept there in a book containing the four Gospels 408
  ――――’s, St. monastery, iii. 309. At Padstow, destroyed by the Danes 281
  ―――― St. priory, Bodmin, i. 116
  Petrocstow, iii. 277
  Pettigrew manor, ii. 57
  Petunia nyctaginiflora, iv. 182
  ―――― Phœnicia, iv. 182
  Petvin, John, iii. 313
  Pevensey marsh, iii. 10
  Pever, the heiress of, ii. 109
  Peverell, Sir Hugh, and Sir Thomas, i. 92
  ―――― of Hatfield, Jane, wife of Randolph, and concubine of William
    the Conqueror, i. 367 _ter._ William her son 367
  ―――― of park, i. 367. Richard Thomas, and arms 368
  Peverell’s crosses, i. 368
  Pewterers’ company send a deputy to try the Cornish tin, ii. 30
  Peyron, father, i. 192
  Philack, i. 344
  Philip and Mary, iii. 213, 294, 325
  ―――― King of France invaded Normandy in Richard’s absence, ii. 177
  Philipps, i. 78
  Philips, Jasper, iii. 339. Sir Jonathan 458. His servant 461
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel and Sarah, ii. 352
  ―――― of Poughill, ii. 300
  Phillack, i. 355.――Parish, ii. 141, 145, 146 _bis_, 147
  PHILLACK, parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation
    boundaries, saint, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 339. By
    the Editor, church, situation of village, danger from the sand,
    inundations of sand, hillocks of it ibid. Houses buried under it,
    Towan, extension of trade, improvement of the harbour, mining and
    smelting, Mr. Edwards 340. Rivalship with Mr. Harvey, both improved
    the harbour, bars in the mouths of all rivers, a causeway upon
    arches across the entrance of the main estuary 341. Castle Cayle,
    and Riviere at Theodore’s castle, Mr. Whitaker’s invention, new
    house at Riviere, Trevassack 342. Modern house on Bodrigy, Penpoll,
    Treglisson farm, copper works at Hoyle, smelting house at Angarrack,
    fine garden there, advowson 343. Incumbent, present rector and
    patron, parish feast and statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, Sand
    hills, sand restrained by plants 344. Sometimes consolidated into
    sandstone. By Editor, copper lodes and elvan courses, Whele Alfred 345
  Philleigh parish, ii. 265
  Philley parish, ii. 2, 275 _bis_, 279――iii. 402, 403
  Phillips, Matthew, i. 360, 362.――Rev. Jasper, ii. 146. Mary 269.
    Rev. William 386, 406. His monument at Lanteglos 406. Mr. 150, 386, 389
  ―――― of Carnequidden in Gulval, Henry and Jane, ii. 241
  ―――― of Landue, Thomas, ii. 400
  ―――― of Pendrea, Samuel, ii. 269, 352. Sarah 352
  ―――― of Tredrea, Elizabeth, iii. 159
  ―――― of Botreaux castle, T. J. iii. 236 _bis_
  ―――― of Camelford, Charles, John, and Jonathan, i. 380. Sir Jonathan
    134.――Rev. William 380.――Charles, ii. 399 _bis_. Jonathan, Rev.
    William, name 399.――Sir Jonathan and T. W. iii. 235
  Phillipps, Rev. William and family, i. 3.――J. T., iii. 42
  ―――― of Camelford and Newport family, iii. 42
  ―――― of Landue in Lezant, Mr. iii. 235
  ―――― of Trencares, Charles and Sir Jonathan, iv. 45. Rev. William
    45, _bis_. Story of 46. Miss, Mr. and family property 45
  Philological inquiries, ii. 103
  Philopatris, age of, ii. 76
  Philosophical Transactions, i. 149――iii. 250, 251, 378――iv.
    146.――Account of a storm in, ii. 325
  Phœnician castles, ii. 423
  Phœnicians, ii. 3――iii. 395――iv. 168.――Acquainted with Falmouth
    harbour, ii. 19
  Phœnix in her Flames, a tragedy, iv. 97
  “Phraseologia, Latin and English,” iv. 87
  Physalis edulis, iv. 183
  Picardy, pronunciation in, ii. 127
  Pider hundred, i. 9, 209, 231, 232, 289, 386, 388, 407――ii. 253,
    378, 384――iii. 139, 267, 277, 312, 318, 334――iv. 137, 140, 160
    _bis_, 162
  Pidre, iv. 376.――Etymology, i. 9
  Pig’s street, Penryn, iii. 62
  Pilate, iii. 422
  Pilchards, nature of, ii. 263. Methods of fishing for 261. Of
    preserving, oil from 263. Caught by seine nets at St. Keverne 324
  Pillaton, or Pillton manor, iii. 345, 346
  ―――― parish, i. 103, 104, 316――ii. 361, 364――iii. 161, 371
  PILLATON parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a rectory, value, patron, manor, iii. 345. By the Editor, Lysons on
    Pillaton and Hardenfast manors, Pentillie castle, church and its
    monuments, one to the Rev. Mr. Eliot, church, town small, Penter’s
    cross village, patron 346. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 347
  Pinard, Arthur, ii. 423
  Pinaster fir, account of, iii. 11
  Pincerna, etymology of, ii. 148
  ―――― Richard, ii. 148. Simon 145, _bis_, 146 _bis_.――Simon, iii.
    139. Heir 140 _ter._ Family 140
  Pindar, iii. 34
  ―――― Peter, iii. 220
  Pineck parish, i. 414――ii. 142.――St. iv. 128
  Pinneck, John, ii. 170
  Pinnock, St. parish, iii. 13, 260
  PINNOCK, St. parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, iii. 347. By the
    Editor, village, and manor of Trevillis, proprietors of land,
    advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 348
  Pinock, ii. 157
  Pipe Rolls, ii. 423
  Piper, Hugh, and Sir Hugh Constables of Launceston castle, anecdote
    of Sir Hugh, ii. 421. His monument in Launceston church 422.――Miss,
    iii. 136. Heiress and family 337
  Piran bay, iii. 313
  ―――― parish, iii. 324
  ―――― round, iii. 328. Account of 329――iv. 78
  ―――― Arworthall church, iv. 3
  ―――― St. church lands, iii. 328
  ―――― St. family, iii. 328
  ―――― St. manor, account of, iii. 328
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 2 _ter._ Mr. Reed’s smelting house in 4
  ―――― St. in the Sands parish, iii. 267
  ―――― St. in the Sands town, iii. 332
  Piran’s, St. well, iii. 322
  Piranes, St. in the Sands, by Leland, iv. 268
  ―――― St. or Keverine, by Leland, iv. 270
  Pirran in Treth parish, iii. 323
  Piskies or fairies, i. 18
  Pitleman, Ralph, ii. 427
  Pits’ writings on Britain, ii. 62
  Pits, iv. 145 _bis_, 148, de Illustribus Angliæ Scriptoribus 148
  Pitt, Robert, i. 69. Thomas 69 _bis_. Thomas 1st Lord Camelford 69.
    His talents 71. Thomas 66, 67. His descent, enterprise in India,
    return with diamond, its sale to the Regent Orleans, its weight, his
    purchase of Boconnoc and the burgess tenures of Old Sarum, election
    for Old Sarum 68. Thomas 2nd Lord Camelford, his birth and
    christening, education, history, character 70. Death 71. William,
    Earl of Chatham 69.――Family, ii. 339, 376, 412. Thomas 353, 354,
    409, 410. William 339. Governor 353. Mr. 410. Pleased with Dr.
    Glynn’s invitations 154.――Thomas, iii. 450. Mr. 207. Governor
    450.――Mr. iv. 44
  ―――― of Boconnock, Thomas, ii. 405
  Pitz, Rev. Mr. ii. 258――iv. 53
  Pius 2nd, pope, iv. 146
  Place of death, i. 9
  Place or Plase, i. 28
  Placentia, iii. 400
  ―――― University, i. 311
  Plague at St. Cuthbert, i. 292.――At St. Ives, ii. 271
  Plain-an-Guary, iii. 384
  Plantagenet, Princess Elizabeth, i. 63. Princess Katherine
    64.――Humphrey 4th son of King Henry 4th, ii. 260. Margaret,
    Countess of Salisbury 91. Richard Earl or Cornwall 155.――Richard,
    iii. 27
  ―――― or Beaufort, Edmund, Edmund Marquis of Dorset, and Henry, ii.
    260.――Margaret, iii. 65
  ―――― civil wars, iii. 289
  ―――― house of, ii. 110, 249
  Plantagenets, iii. 84, 246. Their times 8, 348――iv. 114
  Plants of Cornwall, App. 3, iv. 180
  Plase, ii. 40. Account of 43
  Plassey, battle of, i. 390――iv. 11
  Pleas of the crown, i. 119, 177
  Plegmund, Archbishop, i. 95
  Plengway village, Amphitheatre at, iii. 384
  Plint, i. 316
  Pliny, i. 192――ii. 408――iii. 328
  Plot’s, Dr. Natural History of Oxford, iii. 323
  Plowden, William, iii. 38. Mr. 37. Family 38
  Pluwent or Plynt, iii. 291
  Plym river, ii. 2
  Plymouth breakwater, ii. 245
  ―――― castle, i. 105――ii. 10
  ―――― church, dedicated to St. Charles, ii. 20
  ―――― dockyard, high water at, iii. 375
  ―――― harbour, iii. 101, 105, 108, 164, 375, 461.――Superior to
    Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― limestone, iv. 123 _bis_.――Burnt for manure, ii. 361
  ―――― reef or breakwater described, iii. 108. Compared with the great
    Egyptian pyramid 109
  ―――― road, ii. 396
  ―――― sound, i. 189――ii. 45, 108 _bis_, 164, 375, 379, 380. French
    and Spanish fleets in, ii. 245
  ―――― town, i. 113 _bis_――ii. 10, 224――iii. 21, 45, 98, 109, 110,
    121, 183, 189, 196, 253, 254, 283, 378, 399, 426――iv. 32, 115, 116,
    123, 187, 188 _ter._――Ruthven, governor of, i. 113.――Relief of,
    incompetent to sustain an attack, ii. 245. Cornish miners marched to
    defend, open to attack but escaped it, Major Trelawny, governor of
    67. Engagement with Dutch fleet before 25.――Dr. Borlase educated at,
    iii. 51. Besieged by Charles’s troops, Earl of Stamford, governor
    184.――General Trelawny, governor of, iv. 94. Siege of 185 _ter._
  Plympton, i. 170――iv. 185
  ―――― priory, i. 27――ii. 339――iii. 139 _bis_. Prior of 139
    _bis_.――Godfrey, prior of, ii. 426
  Plynt parish, ii. 409
  Pochehelle, iii. 349
  Poictiers, Archdeacon of, ii. 415
  ―――― Bishop of, St. Hilary, ii. 168, 169. Died at 169
  ―――― Earl of, Richard, ii. 422
  Point, the, iii. 107, 108
  Pol, St. de Leon, town, in Brittany, iii. 285
  Polamonter, Nicholas, i. 234
  Poland, i. 336
  Polbenro, account of, iv. 36
  Poldice mine, ii. 134
  Pole, Sir Courtenay and Penelope, ii. 379.――Rev. Reginald, iii.
    440.――De la, Edmund, Earl of Suffolk, i. 86
  ―――― Carew, Mrs. R., iii. 229
  Polglase, account of, i. 399
  Polgoda, ii. 173
  Polgooth mine, iii. 198. Account of 195, 197
  Polgorran, account of, ii. 113
  Polgover, iii. 252――iv. 3
  Poljew cove, ii. 129
  Polkerris harbour, iv. 109
  Polkinghorne, Roger, iii. 83
  Polkinhorn, iii. 387
  Polkinhorne, account of, ii. 142
  ―――― Degary, i. 257.――Mr. ii. 157. Rev. Mr. 258, 260
  ―――― of Polkinhorne, family, heir, and arms, iii. 142
  Polland, Lewis, ii. 195
  Pollard, Peter, i. 216.――Christopher, iii. 358
  ―――― of Treleigh, Hugh, John, John a tribute to, Margaret and
    family, iii. 383
  Polleowe, iii. 326
  Pollephant, i. 308
  Pollrewen tower, iv. 229
  Pollyfont or Pollifont manor, iii. 38, 39. In Lewannick 233 _bis_
  Polman, ii. 41
  Polmanter downs, ii. 271
  Polmear cove, iv. 166
  Polpear, iii. 7
  Polpera or Polperro, iv. 23, 36, 38
  Polperro harbour, ii. 400
  ―――― town, ii. 400 _bis_. Scenery beautiful 400, 401
  Polruan, ii. 411――iv. 36.――Account of, ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279,
    290.――Formerly a corporate borough, ii. 412
  Polruddon ruins, by Norden and Lysons, i. 46
  Polskatho or Porthskatho, ii. 51
  Polston, bridge at, ii. 432.――Bridge, Charles 1st entered Cornwall
    by, iv. 185
  Poltare, account of, iii. 88
  Poltesca, iii. 424
  Polton manor, ii. 253
  Polvellan, iii. 229. Etymology 230
  Polventon, iv. 29
  Polvessan, account of, iv. 133. The grounds in a fine state 35
  Polvethan manor, ii. 400
  Polwhele, account of, i. 205
  ―――― castle, iv. 229
  ―――― i. 56 _bis_, 58, 205, 255. Degory 19, 293. Arms 205. Motto
    206.――Family, ii. 337.――Rev. Richard of Manaccan and Newlyn, iii.
    113, 271. Character of 112.――Rev. Richard came from Truro, iv. 86.
    Rev. Richard communicated to the Editor some missing portions of
    Hals’s MS. 184
  ―――― of Newland, i. 105
  ―――― of Penhellick, John and Robert, i. 207
  ―――― of Polwhele, i. 207. Degory ibid. Drew 207 _bis_. John 206,
    207. Richard 207. Rev. Rich., 208
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 396. John ibid.
  ――――’s History of Cornwall, i. 288
  Polybius, on Signals, the friend of Scipio Africanus, his general
    history, iii. 106
  Polychronicon, author of, iv. 93
  Polyenetes, or the Martyr, a tragedy, iv. 97
  Polyfunt in Trewenn, iv. 68
  Polygala speciosa, iv. 183
  ―――― myrtifolia, iv. 183
  Pomeray, i. 348
  ―――― Henry de la, ii. 180, 183. Took St. Michael’s mount 177.
    Murdered a sergeant-at-arms, his stratagem for surprising Mount St.
    Michael 178. Held it out, submitted, his death 180; or Pomeroye,
    Henry de la, iii. 22, 78, 90
  Pomeroy, Henry de, i. 295, 296. Henry 296 _bis_. Sir Henry 296. Sir
    Hugh 214. Joel 296 _bis_. Josceline, Ralph de, and Sir Roger 296.
    Thomas 214. Arms 297.――Rev. John, ii. 279, 339. Mr. 43.――Family,
    iii. 90. John 260
  Pomeroy of Bury Pomeroy, Devon, Sir Richard, iii. 148. Lords of Bury
    Pomeroy 90
  ―――― of Tregony Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_. Henry 297
  Pomery, Rev. Mr. i. 403.――Rev. Joseph, iii. 348 _bis_.――Mr. iv. 160
  Pomier, Lord, ii. 39
  Pondicherry, siege of, chief seat of French power in India, iv. 11
  Ponsanmouth, iv. 3
  Ponsmur, i. 256
  Pontis Riale river, source of, iv. 237
  Pontus, i. 388 _bis_
  Pool mine, ii. 239
  Poole, account of by Hals, iii. 168. By Tonkin 170
  Pooley, Rev. Mr. ii. 34.――Rev. Henry of Newlin, iii. 271, 275
  Poor Knights of Windsor, Hugh Trevanion one of, ii. 52, 54. Governor
    of 55
  ―――― rates at Helston, ii. 159
  Pope of Rome, i. 139, 146――ii. 371. Urged Richard to the crusades
    177. Lodged Thomas Paleolagus, and allowed him a pension 368. His
    protection of him 371.――Alexander the 4th, i. 176.――Boniface, ii.
    288. Gregory 290. Gregory the Great 287. St. Gregory 288.――Gregory
    9th, i. 312. Innocent 3rd 110, 112. Innocent the 4th 176. Innocent
    the 5th 110. Leo the 9th 110 _ter._ Nicholas the 2nd 110. Pelagius
    the 2nd 393. Victor the 2nd 110 _bis_
  ―――― Alexander, the poet, i. 58――iii. 53 _ter._ His letter to Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. his large fortune, and house called the Vatican 88
  ――――’s annates, ii. 59, 126
  ―――― inquisition into the value of benefices, iv. 185. _See
    Inquisition_
  Popham, Sir Home and Captain, iii. 446
  Population of Cornwall, App. II. iv. 178. Of all the parishes in
    Cornwall from the last parliamentary statements 177. For several
    years from 1700 to 1831, 178
  ―――― return for Helston, ii. 161
  Porkellis, neighbourhood produced the best tin in Cornwall, ii. 140
  Porrown Berry, iii. 202
  Port, Hugo de, iii. 115
  Port Eliot, ii. 68, 70 _bis_――iii. 107
  ―――― Isaac, i. 384, 385――iv. 47
  ―――― Looe, iii. 249
  ―――― Looe barton, iv. 25, 26, 37 _bis_
  ―――― Prior, name changed, iii. 107
  Portbend, high water at, iii. 98
  Portbyhan, otherwise West Looe, iv. 28
  Portello, lands of, iii. 294
  Porter, i. 320.――Mr. and arms, iii. 66.――Charles, iv. 62. Rev.
    Charles of Warbstow 125
  Porth, i. 29
  Porth Alla, ii. 250, 324, 330 _bis_, 331. The stream which
    discharges at 330
  ―――― chapel, i. 12
  ―――― Enys, iii. 288. Name changed 286
  ―――― Horne, i. 324――ii. 174, 200
  ―――― Kernow, iii. 32.――Shells at, i. 148
  ―――― Prior, now Port Eliot, ii. 66
  ―――― Talland, iv. 24
  ―――― Treth, ii. 239
  Portheran, ii. 41
  Porthguin, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthiley, iii. 129
  Porthissek, by Leland, iv. 259
  Porthleaven, iii. 444
  Porthmear, i. 47
  Porthmellin cove, iii. 192
  Porthoustock, ii. 324――iii. 259.――Extraordinary shoal of pilchards
    at, ii. 324
  ―――― rock, ii. 331
  Porthpean, i. 49
  Porthskatho cove, ii. 58
  Porthwrinkle, iii. 439
  Portionists, iv. 45
  Portnadle bay, iv. 28
  Porto Bello, iii. 218
  Portreath, ii. 241, 250.――Harbour, iii. 390.――A safe harbour, used
    to exchange copper for coal, ii. 241
  Portsmouth, ii. 246. Loss of the Mary Rose off 342
  ―――― castle, ii. 10
  ―――― harbour superior to Falmouth for large ships, ii. 18
  ―――― town, ii. 10
  Portuan borough, iv. 20, 21
  ―――― manor, iv. 21
  Portugal, ii. 227――iii. 187, 423
  Post, in Queen Elizabeth’s time, i. 59
  Potatoes being introduced into Cornwall, iv. 50
  Potstone, iv. 70
  Pott, John, iii. 16
  Poughill parish, ii. 340, 430――iv. 12, 15
  POUGHILL parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, ancient name, impropriation,
    Pochehelle manor, iii. 349. By the Editor, small, its advantages,
    manor ibid. The charters, murder of Nicholas Radford 350. Flexbury
    and Bushill, impropriator of tithes, Stamford-hill and Sir B.
    Granville’s victory there, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 351
  Poul pier, by Leland, iv. 290
  Poulpirrhe, by Leland, iv. 279
  Poulton manor, iii. 2
  Poundstock parish, ii. 232――iii. 114――iv. 15, 136
  POUNDSTOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, value of benefice, impropriation, patron, incumbent,
    Trebarfoot, Penfoune, manor of Poundstock, iii. 352. By the Editor,
    situation of church, Tregoll, manors of Launcels, West Widemouth and
    Woolston, great tithes, advowson, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 353
  Powder hundred, i. 41, 52, 202, 388, 393――iii. 24, 55, 180, 190
    _bis_, 195, 198, 207, 210, 354, 391, 395, 402 _ter._, 403, 448,
    450――iv. 70, 71, 75, 97, 102, 115, 116, 117.――Powdre, i. 242, 251,
    294, 413――ii. 24, 36, 50, 88, 105, 275 _bis_, 298, 315, 352, 356,
    390――iv. 376
  Powderham hundred, etymology, i. 15
  Powell, David, i. 305
  Powley, Hugh, iii. 6
  Powvallet Coyt manor, ii. 38
  Poyctou, iv. 144
  Poyntz, of Berkshire, William and William Stephen, ii. 385
  ―――― of Cowdray castle, Sussex, William Stephen, iii. 231.――Family,
    ii. 354
  Pradannack manor, iii. 258, 259
  Praed, i. 346, 349. James 349, 350.――Family, ii. 241. Humphrey
    Mackworth, M.P. 264. His act for improving the fisheries at St.
    Ives 264.――Arabella and Catherine, iii. 10. Rev. Herbert 9. James
    and his marriage 11. Julia and Mary 10. William 9, 10. Character,
    marriage, &c. 10. Death 11. Colonel 8. Mr. 7, 8. His liberality 7.
    Mr. singular story of, and his death 9. Family, account of 8.
    Remark on 11. Name 9
  Praed, of Trevethew, Florence and James, i. 357.――H. M., iii. 9
    _ter._, 54, 93, 239. His character 9. Improved Trevethow and the
    plantations of Cornwall 11. Improved a valley 59. Rev. Herbert of
    Ludgvan, his son 54. James 444. Mary 239 _bis_. Miss 444. Mr. 85
    _bis_.――Mr. iv. 58. Family 54
  Prake, Mr. 110 years old, iv. 24
  Pratt, Mr. i. 283
  Preaching monks, i. 310
  Precays, i. 417
  Presbyterians, iv. 73.――Their rupture with Mr. Stephens, ii. 270
  Prest, Agnes, her history, i. 108. Place of her martyrdom 111
  Prestwood family, ii. 91. Thomas 196
  Pretender’s army defeated at Preston, ii. 112
  Prewbody, ii. 337
  Priam, iii. 418 _ter._, 420
  Price, Piercy, i. 275.――Winifred, ii. 93.――John, iii. 86 _bis_, 86,
    87, 289 _bis_. Found a ring, and erected a monument in memory of it
    289, 290. Rose 289. Sir Rose 85, 86. Story of 87. Lady 86. Mr. was
    of the expedition to Jamaica 85
  ―――― of Trewardreva, Thomas, ii. 93
  Prideaux, in Luxilian, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― castle, iii. 56
  ―――― i. 74, 76, 117, 266, 289 _bis_, 294, 299, 349, 385. Adiston
    160. Edmund 399. Matthew 349. William 160.――Dean, ii. 78. His
    “Connections” and remarks upon 76.――Notice of him, iii. 278. His
    house 281. Edmund 278. Family 238. Possess part of the tithes of
    Padstow 280
  ―――― of Boswithgye, Peter, i. 43
  ―――― of Devon, Sir Edmund, i. 259
  ―――― of Fewborough, i. 17――ii. 335
  ―――― of Gunlyn, i. 243, 244
  ―――― of Netherton, Devon, Sir Edmund, and arms, ii. 242.――Sir John,
    iii. 278. Family 237――iv. 137
  Prideaux of Orchardton, Sir John, i. 346, 347
  ―――― of Padstow, i. 172.――Had a staircase from Stowe, ii. 351.――Rev.
    Charles, iii. 279. Edmund 3. Nicholas, his character, built his
    house at Padstow 279. Mr. 56. Family, and arms 279. Monuments 280
  ―――― of Plase house, Edward, i. 17
  ―――― of Prideaux, Roger, Thomas, _bis_, family, and arms, iii. 56
  ―――― manor, iii. 57 _bis_. Account of 56
  Prince’s “Worthies of Devon,” i. 144, 346, 348――ii. 61――iii. 184,
    222――iv. 15
  Prince of Wales, iii. 222
  Prior park, i. 57, 58.――A house at Truro built of stone from, ii. 33
  Prior’s cross, i. 368
  Priory of Bodmin, i. 73. Its dissolution, and value of its revenues 74
  Prisk, i. 237
  Probus church, iii. 180――iv. 135
  ―――― and Grace Fair, iii. 364
  ―――― parish, iii. 180, 182, 188, 243, 269, 448, 450, 451――iv. 156;
    or St. Probus, ii. 2, 305, 353 _bis_
  PROBUS parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, impropriation, patron, impropriator, incumbent,
    manor of Moresk, Trehane, iii. 354. Carvean, Trewother, manor of
    Trelowthes, Trewithgy, Trevorva 355. Proverb upon it, Trewithan,
    manor of Wolveden or Golden 356. Ruin of the Tregians, Camden’s
    mention of it 357. Tonkin descended from them, list of their
    forfeited estates 358. The place where Cuthbert Mayne was found is
    still shewn, Tregian twenty years in prison, his son suffered a
    second loss of property 360. In consequence of the gunpowder plot,
    retired to Spain, the Marquis of St. Angelo, Talbot, Tredenham
    361. Curvoza 362. By the Editor, church and monuments, Mr. Thomas
    Hawkins introduced inoculation into Cornwall, church tower ibid.
    Compared with others, church was collegiate, a fair, Prince
    Charles visited most gentlemen in the west of Cornwall, Mr.
    Williams went up to congratulate the King on his Restoration 363.
    Name of the fair, the saints Probus and Grace, skeletons found in
    the chancel wall, Whitaker’s memoranda, parish feast, etymology of
    Carvean 364. Of Trewithgy, Trenowith, and Treworgy, manor of
    Probus, fortification in Golden 365. Supposed by Whitaker to be a
    Roman camp, Caer Voza, a British. Trehane, the two Dr. Stackhouses
    366. Trewithan, its beauty, Mr. Williams fond of ringing bells,
    peal at Kenwyn church for the amusement of the inhabitants of
    Truro 367. Hawkins family, persecution of Mr. Tregion, more
    victims to religious opinions suffered under Elizabeth than Mary
    368. Tregion’s connections, and especially his wealth incitements
    to his ruin, his own imprudence the ultimate means 369. Editor’s
    remarks on the transaction, and on the tyranny of the Tudor
    monarchs, statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 370.
    Interesting varieties of rock formerly to be seen on the road to
    Grampound, the road now turned 371
  Probus town, i. 242 _bis_, 251, 294, 393, 420. Tower at 48
  ―――― St. and his skeleton, iii. 364
  ―――― St. vicarage, iii. 182. The vicar 181 _quat._, 189
  ―――― Groguth, iii. 354
  Proclamation for the apprehension of Rogers and Street, i. 279
  Prophets, ii. 65
  Prospect, Cornish word for, ii. 200
  Protestants persecuted in Germany, iii. 67
  Prothasius, St. i. 99
  Prouse, ii. 54.――Digory, iii. 358
  Prout, arms, iii. 66
  Prowse, Mrs. Elizabeth, i. 8
  Pryce, Dr. William, iii. 323 _bis_.――His Archæologia Cornu
    Britannica, ii. 255――iii. 390. His Mineralogia Cornubiensis ibid.
    His Vocabulary 362
  Prye, William, i. 215
  Prynne’s records, i. 251
  Psalms, book of, iii. 262
  Psoralia aculeata, iv. 182
  ―――― pinnata, iv. 182
  ―――― spicata, iv. 182
  Ptolemy, i. 256――ii. 172, 199.――The Geographer, iii. 24 _bis_, 25
    _bis_, 395――iv. 39. His geography 8
  Puddicombe, Rev. S. ii. 397.――Rev. Stephen of Morval, iii. 253
  Puntner, harbour at, i. 48
  Purification, feast of, iii. 324
  Putta, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Pyder hundred, i. 115, 212, 404――ii. 89
  Pyderick, Little, parish, i. 212
  Pye, i. 62.――Family, line upon, and arms, iii. 449
  Pylos, ii. 368
  Pyn, Herbert de, iii. 117
  Pyne family, iii. 117
  Pynnock, St. parish, i. 112――ii. 291
  Pyrenees, iv. 159
  Pyrrhus’s saying after a hard earned victory, ii. 342

  Quaker’s meeting, ii. 35
  Quakers, iv. 73
  Quaram, Rev. Mr. rector of Falmouth, iv. 72
  Quarm, Rev. Mr. ii. 4
  Quarme, Robert and Walter, i. 422. Arms ibid.
  ―――― of Creed, Robert, i. 236
  ―――― of Nancar, Rev. Walter, i. 256. Arms ibid.
  Quarrier in Leskeard, iii. 21
  Queen’s college, Oxford, ii. 139, 239
  Question, Mr. iv. 118
  Quethiock parish, i. 409――ii. 361
  QUETHIOCK parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 371. Impropriation, value of benefice, patron, and incumbent
    372. By the Editor, ancient name, Trehunsey manor, Trehunest
    village, antiquity of the church, monuments, appropriation of
    tithes, once a college, its foundation deed printed ibid. The
    rector, now its sole representative, a former chapel, statistics,
    vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 373
  Quick, Anthony, James, John, iv. 55
  Quincy, Rev. S., i. 366
  Quiril, Peter, Bishop of Exeter, i. 300――ii. 412

  Radcliffe observatory, S. P. Rigand, director of, ii. 376
  Raddon, Richard de, ii. 427
  Raddona, Richard de, iv. 77, 82
  Radford, Nicholas, iii. 350
  Radnor, Earl of, i. 383――iii. 170.――Robarts, Earl of, ii. 377, 380.
    John 379, 380. Arms 380.――Last earl, iii. 193. Henry 381
  Raile, John, iii. 387
  Railway, i. 48.――Railways in Redruth, iii. 390
  Rainton rectory, i. 130
  Raith and Raithow, etymology of, ii. 394
  Ralegh, Piers de, Walter de, iii. 269
  Raleigh, Sir Walter, i. 390――ii. 7, 21, 56, 342
  Ralph, i. 344. John 352 _bis_. Rev. John 351, 352, 366. Loveday 352
    _bis_. Mary 352.――John, iii. 2
  Ram or Rame head, i. 343――ii. 106――iv. 32.――Description of, iii. 375
  Rame, Joanna de, iii. 374 _bis_, 438 _bis_. Arms 374
  ―――― manor, account of, iii. 374, 375
  ―――― parish, iii. 101, 108, 110
  RAME parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a
    rectory, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Rame, iii. 374. By the
    Editor, church peculiarly situated, monuments, manor and barton of
    Rame, Rame head, its appearance, and that of the Lizard, St.
    Michael’s chapel, description of the head, boundary of Plymouth
    harbour, its latitude and longitude, and establishment of the port,
    Edystone lighthouse 375. Its latitude and longitude, former danger
    of the rocks, description of the first lighthouse, remarkable storm,
    lighthouse disappeared, improved construction of the second 376.
    Generosity of Louis XIV. fire, terrible accident 377. Erection of
    the third lighthouse, Bond’s description 378. Inscription, Cawsand
    village, and bay, statistics, rector, and patron 379. Geology by Dr.
    Boase 380
  Rame place, iii. 375
  Randall, Thomas, steward of Helston, ii. 160
  Randill, Jonathan, iii. 260
  Randolph of Withiel, iv. 161
  Randyl family, and arms, ii. 353
  ―――― of Tregenno, Richard, i. 421. His arms 421
  Raphel manor, ii. 400
  Rascow island, iv. 230
  Rashleigh, i. 43, 74, 106, 255. Charles, constructs Seaforth harbour
    47. Establishes fishery 48. Origin and history of the family, and
    arms 43.――Family, ii. 91, 294. Philip 295. Philip endowed a hospital
    at Fowey 43. Made a fortune by privateering 44. Purchased the manor
    of Fowey, his ancestors represented it in parliament 46. Philip, a
    zealous naturalist, has published two volumes 47. William 46, 91,
    92. Mr. 397.――Miss, iii. 443. Family 57.――Jonathan, iv. 101. Philip
    140. Mr. 114. Family 99 _bis_, 131, 137 _bis_
  Rashleigh of Disporth, Charles, i. 260, 423
  ―――― of Menabelly, Rachel, i. 257, 259――William, ii. 294, 295. Mr.
    400.――William, iii. 290. Miss 367. Mr. 88. Family 57.――Jonathan and
    Jonathan, ii. 107. Jonathan and his son ibid. Jonathan 109. Rev.
    Jonathan 108. John and John 107. Philip 109. Philip, collector of
    Cornish minerals, has published specimens, constructed a curious
    grotto, his marriage and death 108. William 108, 109 _ter._ Family
    107, 109. One of them sitting in almost every parliament of George
    II. and III. 107
  ―――― of Penquite, Coleman and John, iii. 57
  ―――― house in Ranelagh parish, Devon, iv. 101
  Rat island, iv. 230, 266
  Ratcliffe of Franklyn, Devon, Joshua and his daughter, iii. 76
  Ravenna in Italy, ii. 75 _bis_
  Ravenscroft of Cheshire, arms, i. 374
  Rawe, R. J., iii. 387
  ―――― of Pennant, John, i. 383
  Rawle, i. 263――ii. 274. Mr. 273
  Rawlegh’s “Relicta Nomen Viri,” iv. 155
  Rawlinge, Mr. iii. 82
  Rawlings, Thomas, built a house, and William, notice of, iii.
    280.――Thomas, iv. 143
  ―――― of Padstow, Thomas, i. 235, 310.――Thomas, ii. 256.――Rev.
    William, iii. 282. Mr. 178
  Rawlins, Rev. William, jun., ii. 273
  Rawlinson, Mary, and T. H. of Lancaster, iii. 137
  Rawlyn, John, iii. 358
  Ray, the botanist, iii. 173
  Raynwood, John, iii. 211
  Reading, iii. 10
  Rebellion, story of the great, i. 44. History of Flammock’s 86
  Red Cross street, London, iv. 86
  Red sea, place of banishment for exorcised spirits, iii. 48
  Redevers, Earl Baldwin de, ii. 427
  Redgate, i. 179 _bis_. 180 _bis_
  Redinge, i. 206
  Rediver mills, iv. 47
  Redman, Richard, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 189――iii. 147
  Redruth manor, possessors of, iii. 381
  ―――― parish, i. 160, 208, 238, 239――ii. 129, 239 _bis_, 272,
    284――iii. 5, 7――iv. 5
  REDRUTH parish, Hals’s MS. lost. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, a rectory, value, patron, iii. 380. Manor, town, Carew
    brief in Penwith hundred, town now considerable, large corn market,
    had two weekly markets in the reign of Edward III., proceeding of
    Mr. Buller, town chiefly one street 381. Old chapel, landed
    proprietors, manors of Treruff and Tollgus 382. Treleigh manor,
    Tonkin’s tribute to Mr. Pollard, Park Erisey, the barton of Treleigh
    produces tin and copper, the owner imposed upon 383. Plain an Guary,
    church beyond the town, glebe, value of benefice 384. By the Editor,
    situation and description of church, St. Uny, advowson, new chapel,
    Tavistock abbey ibid. Life of St. Rumon, by Leland and Butler,
    etymological conjecture, copper works and slate, handsome shops, and
    good market, quantity of shoes, &c. brought from Penzance 385.
    Market much crowded, new market place, Lord Dunstanville’s clock and
    bell tower, village of Plengwary, Amphitheatre adjacent to,
    etymology, the village called Little Redruth, parish muster book
    386. Great scarcity in 1697, the Flammock insurrection, manor and
    honor of Tehidy, Cornish, Saxon and Norman acre, difference
    between the common and statute acre 388. Extent of Tehidy, notice of
    Lord Dunstanville’s death, meetings to commemorate his virtues,
    monument to be erected on Cambre 389. Landed proprietors, Dr. Pryce,
    railways from Portreath harbour, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase, important mining district 390
  Redruth town, iii. 381. Road to Marazion from 308.――From Truro, ii. 304
  ―――― Little, village, iii. 386
  Reed, Thomas, iv. 3, 4 _bis_. His ancestors 4
  Reenwartha, iii. 328. Account of 326
  Reenwollas, iii. 327 _bis_
  Refishoc manor, iii. 195, 196
  Reform Act, i. 391――iii. 29.――Change produced by, i. 390.――Remarks
    on, iii. 272
  Reformation, iii. 264, 279, 363
  Refry, Henry, iii. 387
  Regent street, iii. 205
  Reginald, Earl of Cornwall, ii. 427 _ter._, 428
  Regulus an abbot, iv. 105
  Reid, i. 259
  Rekellythye, iii. 324
  Relics of antiquity dug up near Camelford, ii. 402, 403
  Religious ceremonies of the Britons, i. 193
  Relistion mine, ii. 144
  Remfry, Henry, iii. 383. Richard 382
  Renaudin, David, John, family, and arms, iii. 303
  ―――― of Arworthal, David, iii. 225 _bis_
  Rendall of Lostwithiel, Elizabeth and Walter, iii. 328
  ―――― of Pelynt, family, iii. 328
  Renfry, Sondry and Thomas, iii. 387
  Rennie, John, the engineer, iii. 378
  Renphry, his son, sold Trewithan, iv. 140
  Reperend Brygge, iv. 255
  Reschell, iii. 111
  Rescorla, i. 49
  Reskimer, by Leland, iv. 270
  ―――― iii. 169.――Heir of, iv. 156
  Reskymer, account of, iii. 133
  ―――― family, ii. 358――iii. 126, 135, 423.――Arms, iv. 96
  ―――― of Reskymer, John, iii. 133. Sir John 133, 147. John and four
    daughters, Richard, Roger and arms 133. Mr. 147 _bis_
  Resogan, Bennet, and John, sen. iii. 325. John, jun., 325, 326
  ―――― of St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 325
  Resparva, i. 386
  Respiration, Dr. Mayne upon, iii. 250
  Restoration, iii. 73
  Restormal, iii. 28
  Restormalle castle, iv. 229
  Restormel, i. 338――iv. 81. By Leland 277
  ―――― castle, ii. 38.――Account of 392
  ―――― hill, ii. 393
  ―――― house, ii. 393
  Restowrick, i. 310
  Restrongar creek, ii. 24
  ―――― passage, ii. 17
  Restonget creek, iii. 224
  ―――― manor, iii. 230, 231. Account of 226
  ―――― passage, iii. 226
  ―――― village, iii. 226
  Resurra in St. Minver, ii. 336
  Resurrans, i. 214. 215 _bis_
  Retallock, iii. 143
  ―――― barrow, account of, i. 220
  Retollock of Trewerre, i. 391
  Revell, Richard, ii. 180
  Revenge, man of war, destroyed in a glorious victory, ii. 342, 344
  Rewley abbey, ii. 138, 139.――Near Oxford, iv. 4 _bis_. Edmund Earl
    of Cornwall’s charter to 4
  Reynolds, i. 61 _ter._, 85. Admiral Carthew, his death 205.――Sir
    Joshua, ii. 306. Admiral, lost at sea 389. Mr. 241. Family 142.――Mr.
    iii. 354
  Rhé, isle of, iii. 183
  Rheese, ii. 173
  Rhodes, Rev. George, i. 354.――Miss, ii. 227. Family 100
  ―――― isle of, i. 411
  Rhys ap Tudor, iv. 8
  Rialobran, iii. 80
  Rialton, Godolphin Lord, i. 123, 126, 234
  Rice, i. 237
  Rich, Lady Lucy, and Robert Earl of Warwick, ii. 379
  Richan, iii. 402
  Richard, Duke of Gloucester, made sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 185
  ―――― 1st, King, i. 54――ii. 118, 177 _bis_, 178, 180 _quat._, 341,
    409――iii. 27 _bis_, 78, 132, 202, 393――iv. 71, 100 _bis_, 102 _bis_,
    112.――Cœur de Lion, i. 254――ii. 249――iii. 7.――Taken prisoner, ii.
    178. Ransomed, returned home, raised an army, and defeated John 179
  ―――― 2nd, ii. 59, 62, 93, 176, 181, 294, 341, 394, 422, 431――iii. 27
    _bis_, 60, 65, 111, 129 _bis_, 148, 269, 303, 436――iv. 22, 36, 99, 101
  ―――― 3rd, ii. 43, 108 _bis_, 115, 185, 231――iii. 101, 102 _ter._,
    142, 184, 203, 393. Slain at the battle of Bosworth 108 _bis_, 185
  ―――― King of the Romans, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 448――iv. 4 _ter._――Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8, 156――iii. 15,
    19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448. Notice of 28. Arms 169
  ―――― St. King of the West Saxons, and his death, iv. 126
  ―――― of Shrewsbury, ii. 186, 187 _bis_
  Richardia, Æthiopica, iv. 182
  Richards, William, iii. 153
  Richardson, i. 383
  Richmond, Earl of, ii. 108 _bis_――iii. 101, 102. Edmund of Hadham 65
  Ridgeway, Earl of Londonderry, i. 69.――John, ii. 70
  Rigaud, S. P., ii. 376
  Rillaton manor, iv. 7
  Rimo, ii. 50
  Rinden, i. 117
  Ringwood of Bradock, Miss, iv. 139
  Risdon’s History of Devon, i. 133.――Manuscript, ii. 341
  Risdon of Babeleigh Giles, iv. 157
  ―――― of Badleigh, Giles, i. 223
  Rist church, i. 148
  Rivers in Cornwall, list of, iv. 223. Their sources 237
  Rivers, Thomas, i. 177
  ―――― Richard Woodvill, Earl of, i. 194
  Riviere, iii. 342 _ter._
  Roach, in France, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Roach parish, i. 41, 212, 218, 310――ii. 1, 93――iii. 195, 442,
    448――iv. 137, 160
  ROACH or Roche, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, antiquity of the parish and town, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, ancient chapel, iii. 391. Description
    of its remains, a pool supposed to ebb and flow 392. The story
    from whence its name of St. Gundred’s well is derived, Treroach or
    Tregarreck, Tremoderet en Hell, ruins of Holywell 393. Hains
    Burrow, Avoh Bicken, every parish in Cornwall formerly had a
    beacon, Colefreth, ruins of a chapel at, well near Pentavale
    Fenton 394. Etymology 395. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    saint, his history ibid. Parish named before he was born, a
    rectory, its value, patron, incumbent, society for purchasing
    advowsons, Tregarick manor, etymology 396. By Whitaker on the
    name, hermitage in the rock 397. By the Editor, the rock and tower
    conspicuous, Lysons says the cell was dedicated to St. Michael,
    Mr. Whitaker draws on his fancy 398. Lysons’s view and description
    of the hermitage, incumbents 399. Observations on the society for
    purchasing advowsons, parish could not be dedicated to St. Roche,
    history of St. Roche, his miraculous cure from the plague 400.
    Pimples called after him, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase, the rock compared with St. Mewan beacon 401
  ―――― rock, i. 189――ii. 283――iii. 265
  ―――― St. church tower, ii. 386
  ―――― St. curacy, ii. 389
  ―――― St. parish, ii. 384
  Road, Truro, i. 227
  Roadstead near St. Ives, ii. 260
  Robartes, i. 384. Lady Essex 378, 379. Seized with small pox a month
    after her marriage 379. Francis 297. Henry Earl of Radnor 293. John
    Earl of Radnor 19, 297, 378, 279. Lord 113, 116. Sir Richard
    293――ii. 9.――Family, iii. 258.――John, ancestor of Charles Bodville,
    Earl of Radnor, John mayor of Truro, iv. 73. John Lord, Baron of
    Truro 74. Lord 161, 185, 187. Family acquired great wealth at Truro,
    engaged in mercantile pursuits there for three generations, rose to
    eminence and acquired the earldom of Radnor temp. James 1st 88
  Robarts, i. 74.――Frances, ii. 379. Francis, Henry and John, origin
    of the family 381.――Family, iii. 57.――Robert, Viscount Bodmin, ii.
    379 _bis_. Esteemed by Charles 2nd 380. John Lord Robarts Earl of
    Falmouth, afterwards Earl of Radnor 379, 380, 382. Earl of Radnor
    377. Charles Bodville 2nd Earl 380. Henry 3rd Earl 380, 381. John
    1st Earl 379, 380, 381, 382. John 4th Earl 381. Richard Lord Truro
    380, 383. His arms 380
  ―――― of Lanhidiock family, iii. 193, 197
  ―――― of Truro, Richard, iii. 234. Family 348
  Roben, John, iii. 387
  Robert, son of Ankitil, ii. 427
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― son of William the Conqueror, ii. 211 _bis_
  Roberts, Sir Richard, i. 19 _bis_.――Richard, ii. 375. Family 170,
    397.――Francis, iii. 170. Family 178
  ―――― of Coran, Hon. John, i. 419
  ―――― of Truro, ii. 93
  Robins, i. 53――ii. 151.――John, iii. 260.――Benjamin, his Mathematical
    Works, iv. 10. Stephen and Miss 156. Family 162
  ―――― of Penryn, James and Thomasine, iii. 134
  ―――― of Tregenno, i. 421. Stephen 421
  ―――― Verian family, John, iv. 116. Arms 117
  Robinson, i. 302. George 303.――Family, ii. 217, 358. George 358.
    William 160 _bis_.――George and his heirs, iii. 419. P. V. 419, 424.
    Rev. William of Ruan Major 419. Miss 75. Mr. 419, 421, 424. Family 423
  ―――― of Cadgwith, George Thomas, his melancholy death, iii. 421.
    Arms 422
  ―――― of Nanceloe, or Nansloe, ii. 139. Rev. William ibid.――iii. 419
  ―――― of Treveneage, Mr. killed by a bull, ii. 221
  Robyns, Mr. iii. 88
  Roche, St. iii. 395, 397, 398――iv. 139.――His history by Hals, iii.
    395, 400. By Editor 400. His death, ib. Supposed to preside over
    certain complaints 401
  Roche parish, iii. 55, 450
  Rochelle, iii. 183
  Rochester, St. Just, Bishop of, ii. 282, 287.――St. Justus and St.
    Paulinus, Bishops of, iii. 284
  Rock, story of one turning round, i. 187
  ―――― ferry in St. Minver, iii. 275, 282, 283
  ―――― island, ii. 1
  Rocks near Land’s End dangerous, iii. 430
  Rodd family, ii. 228, 229. Miss 227. Mr. 134.――Mr. iii. 8
  ―――― of Herefordshire, Capt. Francis, ii. 228
  ―――― of Trebartha, Rev. Edward, ii. 228. Edward, D.D. 281. Col.
    Francis 228. F. H. ib. _bis_, 229. Jane, Adm. Sir J. T. and Harriet
    228. Mr. 99
  ―――― of Trebather, Francis, i. 359. Francis Hearle 360
  Rodda, Miss, ii. 82
  Roderick, King of Wales and Cornwall, iii. 80
  Rodolph 2nd Emperor of Germany, ii. 371
  Rogate parish, Sussex, iii. 205, 206
  Rogers, Anne, i. 270 _ter._, 271, 274. Rev. Edward 242. John
    273.――Brian, iii. 76. Rev. John 137. Rev. John, Rector of Mawnan 77,
    445. His taste, &c., 445. Nicholas 387. Peter 76. Family 75. Arms 76
  ―――― of Antron, Captain John, iii. 445. Improved that place 446
  ―――― of Cannington family, iii. 76
  ―――― of Helston and Penrose, Hugh, John, and John, M.P. the latter
    added to his estates, iii. 445――Of Penrose, near Helston, i.
    228.――John, ii. 128, 243. Mr. 117.――John and Mrs. iii. 88
  ―――― of Skewis, i. 267. Henry 267, 284, 285, 286, 287 _bis_. His
    character 267. Turns his sister-in-law out from Skewis house,
    resists the Sheriff, several men killed 268. Escapes to Salisbury,
    taken, convicted, and executed 269. His trial for the murder of
    Carpenter 270. Defence 272. Trial for the murder of Woolston 274. Of
    Willis 276. Seen in prison 281. Print of him, with his history 282.
    Newspaper reports of the trial 283. His wife 271, 272, 273. His son
    280. Editor’s conversation with 280
  Rogers of Treasson, afterwards of Penrose, John, iii. 47. Rev. J.,
    54. Family 47
  Rogroci, and Lestriake in Germow and Brake, iii. 360
  Rollandus, i. 98
  Rolle, i. 151. Sir Henry 2.――Family, Robert, ii. 313. Samuel 313
    _ter._ Lord 87.――Dennis, iv. 136. Family 41
  ―――― of Stephenton, Henry, iv. 40.――Of Stevenston, John, ii.
    343.――Mr. iii. 117. Family 254
  Rolles family, iii. 117 _bis_
  Rollo, Duke of Normandy, ii. 344, 347
  Rolls family, ii. 416
  Roman army, i. 335
  ―――― calends, iii. 258
  ―――― camp, iii. 319――iv. 78
  ―――― Catholics, persecution of, iii. 368
  ―――― coins, iv. 30.――Found at Camelford, ii. 403
  ―――― Emperor; i. 195
  ―――― fort in Probus, iii. 365
  ―――― idols, iv. 101
  ―――― invasion, iii. 162
  ―――― legions, i. 335
  ―――― martyrology, iv. 96
  ―――― road, iii. 324――iv. 12; or way 15.――From Lincolnshire to Bath,
    and through Somersetshire to the west, iii. 324
  ―――― saturnalia, ii. 164
  ―――― territories in Gaul, i. 335 _bis_
  ―――― work at Berry park, iv. 31. On West Looe Down 29, 30, 31
  Romans, i. 256, 295, 334 _ter._, 335 _bis_――iii. 395.――Encamped in
    various parts of Cornwall, ii. 19. Their castles 423.――Directed
    their roads to the nearest and best fords, iv. 30
  ―――― Richard, King of the, i. 36, 253, 414――ii. 109, 211 _bis_, 392,
    403――iii. 285, 448――iv. 4 _ter._ and Earl of Cornwall, ii. 8,
    156――iii. 15, 19, 28, 169, 268, 285, 448 _bis_
  Rome, i. 197 _quat._, 198 _bis_, 206, 334, 335, 393――ii. 369――iii.
    284, 331, 400, 431, 434 _bis_――iv. 126 _bis_, 146, 148. St. Gorian
    beheaded at 112. Indulgences from, for building Bideford bridge
    341. Thomas Paleologus arrives at 368. Foreigners prohibited from
    living at 371. Greek college founded there 370, 371. Scotch
    college 371. Jubilee of 1601 at 371
  ―――― artists of, iv. 169
  ―――― church of, iii. 357, 368――iv. 165
  ―――― Emperor of, ii. 75
  ―――― St. John Lateran, church at, iv. 165
  ―――― Lateran, gate of, iv. 165
  ―――― papal, tower of, i. 312
  ―――― see of, iii. 150
  Romney, Kent, ii. 202, 210. A Cinque port 38
  ―――― marsh, iii. 10
  Romulus, i. 333
  Roofs, security for, iii. 243
  Roper, Edward, iii. 37. Elizabeth 140
  ―――― of St. Winow, iv. 156
  Roscarnon, ii. 24
  Roscarrack, account of, i. 384
  ―――― family, ii. 357
  ―――― of Roscarrack, i. 384. Charles, John, _bis_, and Richard 384
  ―――― burial place, i. 385
  Roscarrock, Mr. i. 214.――Thomas and Mr. iii. 314. Family 193, 240
  ―――― of Croan, i. 371
  Roscorla, account of, i. 44
  ―――― George de, i. 44 _bis_
  ―――― of Roscorla in St. Austell, William, iii. 188
  Roscrow in Mabe, iii. 125.――Account of, ii. 93, 98
  ―――― family, ii. 93
  ―――― of Penryn, Julian, i. 144, 145
  ―――― of Roscrow, i. 145.――Family and arms, ii. 337
  Roscruge family, and etymology of the name, i. 39
  Rose, no wild ones in the southern hemisphere, iii. 173
  Roseath manor, iv. 3
  Rosecadwell, possessors of, iii. 88
  Rosecorla, i. 420
  Rosecossa, account of, ii. 279
  ―――― Sir John, ii. 279
  Rosecradock, i. 196, 381.――In St. Clear, iii. 172
  Rosehill, iii. 88
  Rosemadons, i. 145
  Rosemodens, manor of, in Buryan, St. Hilary, Paul, and Guinear, iii. 360
  Rosemodris, i. 150
  Rosemorron, account of, ii. 124
  Rosemullion head, iii. 177
  Rosesilian, ii. 398
  Roseteague, ii. 56, 57
  Roseundle, account of, i. 44
  Rosevithney, account of, iii. 47
  Roseworth, account of, ii. 317
  Rosillian, i. 53, 54
  Roskuroh, account of, i. 383
  Roskymer family, ii. 128
  Rosland, ii. 50 _bis_
  Rosmeran, i. 136
  Rosminver, iii. 237
  Rosmodrevy, i. 141 _bis_
  Rosogan, James and John, ii. 192――John, iii. 333
  ―――― of St. Stephens, Elizabeth, i. 400. John 399 _ter._ Arms 400
  Ross, Dr. John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 224――iii. 300.――Solomon de,
    ii. 336
  Rosswick manor, ii. 358
  Rosteage, account of by Hals, ii. 54. By Tonkin 56
  Roswarne, i. 162, 164
  ―――― De, i. 162 _bis_
  Rother, Jane, i. 357
  Rouen, Archbishop of, appointed Regent by Richard 1st, ii. 178
  Rough Tor, i. 131, 132, 201, 307, 310
  Round table, ii. 308
  Rous, Sir Anthony, Recorder of Launceston, ii. 423.――John, iv. 145
  ―――― of Halton, Anthony, i. 313 _bis_. Francis 315. Arms 313
  Rouse, Henry, i. 215.――Captain, Governor of St. Mawe’s castle for
    Cromwell, ii. 277. Lines upon him 278. Robert of Wootton converted
    part of a barn at St. Mawe’s castle into a Presbyterian
    meeting-house, his marriage 278
  Rovier, iii. 342
  Rowe, Rev. John, ii. 432. Rev. William 252. Mr. 139, 157.――Family,
    iii. 215 _bis_, 239
  Rowle, Roger, iii. 185. William 386
  Royal society, iii. 52, 53, 378
  Royalists concealed in a vault, i. 143
  Ruan castle, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― St. iii. 419
  ―――― Lanihorne manor belonged to the Archdekne family, iv. 121
  ―――― or Lanyhorne parish, i. 294――ii. 2, 356――iii. 40, 385――iv. 115,
    117 _bis_, 121
  RUAN LANIHORNE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology,
    ancient name, value of benefice, iii. 402. Patron, incumbent, land
    tax, Tregago, its etymology 403. By Tonkin, situation and
    boundaries, value of benefice, Lanyhorne castle ibid. Situation and
    description of it, pulled down, turned into a little town, trade by
    shipping 404. A rectory, value, patron, two incumbents 405. By the
    Editor, situation of the church, the creek stopped up, the castle,
    Arcedekne family ibid. Manors of Lanihorne and Elerchy, Treviles,
    Mr. Whitaker’s account of this parish, memoir of him, his death 406.
    Memorial, Editor’s character of him, and of his writings, his
    defence of Mary Queen of Scots 407. His error respecting the ancient
    cathedral of Cornwall, has printed two volumes on the subject,
    containing invective against Dr. Borlase and others, extracts made
    by Mr. Forschall from a MS. in the British Museum, description of
    the volume 408. The extracts in Saxon 409. List of the Bishops of
    Cornwall and of Devonshire 415. See tranferred to Exeter, reason of
    Edward the elder for endowing the Bishoprick of Crediton,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 416
  Ruan Major, or St. Ruan Major parish, ii. 116, 358――iii. 128, 257,
    385, 421, 423 _bis_. Rectory 258
  RUAN MAJOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, barton of Erisey,
    iii. 16. Family, story of Mrs. Erisey leaving her husband and taking
    her daughter with her, his distress compared with Hector’s on
    parting with Andromache 417. Translation of Hector’s address to
    Andromache, Hals’s deduction from it of Homer’s and Hector’s opinion
    upon marriage, dexterity of another, Mr. Erisey admired by James
    1st, who objected to his name 418. Parish existing before Wolsey’s
    Inquisition, value, patron, land tax 419. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, name, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent. By the
    Editor, family, and barton of Erisey, advowson ibid. Hals’s specimen
    of Homer, the same passage from Pope, statistics, incumbent, patron,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 420
  Ruan Minor parish, ii. 116, 319, 358――iii. 128, 385, 416, 419
  RUAN MINOR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, patron,
    incumbent, Cadgwith, Mr. Robinson’s encounter with a bull, iii. 421.
    He died in three or four days, opinions of his neighbours, our
    Saviour’s judgment, Meneage comprehended in Lizard, etymology of
    Lizard and the dangerous nature of the coast 422. By Tonkin,
    boundaries, patron, incumbent, value 423. By the Editor, Cadgwith
    cove, succession of property in the parish ibid. Singular claim
    belonging to the rector, statistics, incumbent, patron, Geology by
    Dr. Boase, Geology of the Lizard district in the “Transactions of
    the Cornish Geological Society” 424
  Rudall, Rev. Edward, i. 111
  Rudyard, John, built the 2nd lighthouse at Eddystone, iii. 376, 377, 378
  Ruffo, Roger, iv. 27
  Rugeham, iii. 350
  Rume parish, ii. 252
  Rumor, St. iii. 384 _bis_, 459. His life 385
  Runawartha, iii. 326
  Rundle, i. 136
  Rupe de, or Roach, Ralph, iii. 393. Family 391, 392, 393
  Rupert, Prince, arrived in Cornwall, and accompanied the King, iv. 186
  Rupibus, Peter de, i. 130
  Rushes, planted as a fence against the sand, ii. 150
  Russell, John, Lord, i. 301.――Lost an eye at the siege of Montrueil,
    sent to oppose the Cornish rebels, iii. 196. Meets them 197. Rev.
    John 275. Mr. 11
  ―――― of Exeter, Mr. made a fortune by the Lisbon trade, ii. 19
  Ruthes chapel, i. 218
  Ruthven, governor of Plymouth, i. 113
  Rutland, ii. 89
  ―――― Henry, Earl of, i. 9
  Ruydacus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Ryalton manor, i. 209, 234, 246, 250――iv. 138, 139. Account of 231
  Ryalton mansion house, i. 74, 233
  Rycaut’s history, ii. 368
  Rye, Naval armaments defeated by Fowey, ii. 45
  Rysbank, i. 169
  Ryvier castle, by Leland, iv. 265

  Sabina Popeia, i. 329
  Saccombe of Trewinnow, i. 257
  Sadler, Captain, i. 270
  Saigar, iii. 331
  St. Alban’s, battle of, iii. 294
  St. Asaph, William Lloyd, Bishop of, one of the seven, iii. 299
  Saint Aubyn. _See Seynt Aubyn_
  St. Barbe, Francis, iii. 224
  St. Clare, Sophia, a novel, iii. 34
  St. George, Clarence and Sir Richard, iii. 61
  St. John family, iii. 270
  St. Martin, Aldred de, iv. 77, 83
  St. Maur, William, ii. 189
  St. Pierre, Eustace, ii. 158
  Saints, Sieur D. T.’s Book of, i. 214
  Salamanca university, i. 311
  Salamis, iii. 216
  Salem in America, iii. 72 _ter._
  Salian Way, i. 393
  Salisbury, rebels march through, i. 87. Henry Rogers escapes to, and
    is there apprehended 269, 282
  ―――― Bishop of, John Coldwell, ii. 7. Lionel Woodvill 194
  ―――― Earl of, i. 168.――Cecil, ii. 66. Robert Cecil 213. Montacute
    91. Nevill, Richard 182. Plantagenet, Margaret, Countess 91
  ―――― plain, a nucleus of three chalky ridges, iii. 10
  Salmatius, i. 192
  Salmenica, castle of, ii. 368
  Salmon of the Alan and Val, i. 74
  Salmon, John, ii. 192
  ――――’s Survey of England, iv. 8
  Saltash, the Tamara of the Britons, iv. 40
  ―――― borough, John Lemon, M.P. for, iii. 229
  ―――― passage, iv. 185, 188
  ―――― river, i. 32
  ―――― town, i. 77, 103, 113, 203――ii. 59, 76, 79, 254――iii. 110, 380
  Salter, George, iii. 350. William of Devonshire 211, 215
  Salterne of Penheale, i. 379
  Saltren, John. iii. 276 _bis_
  Salvia cardinalis, iv. 182
  ―――― grahami, iv. 182
  ―――― involucrata, iv. 182
  Sammes’s Britannia, i. 120
  Sampford Courtenay, i. 170
  Sampson, the Jewish Hercules, iii. 280
  ―――― the younger, Archbishop of Dole, iii. 336
  ―――― Benjamin, his gunpowder manufactory and elegant residence, iii.
    305. Martin 16
  ―――― island, iv. 174. Extent of 175
  ―――― St. ii. 231. Hals’s uninteresting history of, Giant church
    dedicated to 90.――His history, iii. 281
  ―――― St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 280
  SAMPSON’S, St. or Glant parish, ii. 89 _bis_, 90 _bis_, _see Glant_
  ―――― St. de South-hill church, ii. 231
  San or Saint explained, iv. 312
  Sancred, or Sancreed parish, iii. 242, 283
  ―――― St. iii. 425
  SANCREED parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, land tax, rich lodes of tin, iii. 425. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name ibid. A vicarage, value, patron 426. By
    the Editor, church and monuments, one to Mrs. Bird, memoir of her,
    impropriation and patronage, consecrated well, St. Euny’s chapel,
    Hals’s dissertation on Creeds ibid. Pronounced Sancrist, Drift,
    Tregonnebris, late vicar, statistics, present vicar, patron, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 427
  Sancrit, iii. 78
  Sancroft, William, Archbishop of Canterbury, committed to the tower,
    iii. 296, 299
  Sanctuary manor, iv. 17
  Sand, inundated great part of Cornwall, ii. 149. Difficulty of
    burning the calcareous to lime 150.――Encroachments of, iii. 340.
    Confined by roots of plants 344.――Important for manure, iv. 17
  ―――― place, iii. 252
  Sandal, John, i. 251
  Sander’s land, i. 187
  Sanders, Mr. iv. 74
  Sandford, i. 317
  Sandhill, account of, i. 158
  Sands, John, i. 24.――Lord, and Hester his daughter, iii. 145
  Sandwich, i. 169.――A Cinque port, ii. 38
  ―――― Edward Montagu, Earl of, iii. 104
  Sandys, Sir Edwin, Edwin Archbishop of York, arms, iii. 158.――Rev.
    William, tutor to Lord de Dunstanville, ii. 244.――Rev. William, iii.
    10, 238, 239 _bis_, 240. Called the Cardinal, monument to 239.
    William 241
  ―――― of Hedbury, Worcestershire, Margaret and Sir William, iii. 158.
    William 158, 159. Sir William 158. Family 156. The Editor, their
    heir 159. Arms 158.――Edwyn, Lord, iv. 57
  ―――― of Helston, Mary, Mr. ii. 218.――Of St. Minver, Mr. iv. 104
  ―――― of Lanarth, Rev. Sampson, William, ii. 327
  ―――― of Ombersley, ii. 327
  ―――― of the Vine, Basingstoke, Hants, Edwin, iii. 159. Elizabeth
    158. Henry 157 _quat._, 158 _ter._, 158, 159. Hester 157 _ter._, 158
    _ter._, 159 _bis_. Margaret, William Lord 158.――Edwyn, Lord, raised
    a regiment of foot, and another of horse for Charles 1st, his death,
    iv. 58. William Lord 57 _bis_
  ―――― of the Vine peerage, petition for, iv. 58
  Saneret parish, ii. 282
  Sanns, John and Sampson, ii. 320
  Sans, word explained, iv. 317
  Santy, Edmund, iii. 324
  Saplyn, William, i. 215 _bis_
  Saracens, i. 414――ii. 37
  Sarah, i. 414
  Sargeaux of Court, family, ii. 394, 395. Alice 395 _bis_. Richard
    394 _ter._ Richard, jun. and Richard Sheriff of Cornwall 394. Sir
    Richard, ib. _ter._ Arms 395
  Sarum, borough, ii. 162.――Old, burgage tenures purchased by governor
    Pitt, and his election for, i. 68
  “Satyrs of Juvenal and Persius,” notes on, iv. 87
  Saunder’s hill, iii. 280
  Saviour’s, St. chapel, Padstow, iii. 281
  Sawah, iii. 33
  Sawle, Joseph, i. 43――iii. 200――Family, iv. 101
  ―――― of Penrice, Joseph and Mary, i. 222.――Mr. iii. 279
  Saxifraga sarmentosa, iv. 182
  Saxon camp, iv. 78
  ―――― Chronicle, ii. 403――iii. 310
  ―――― fort, iii. 322
  ―――― kings, tradition of seven dining together, ii. 284
  ―――― saint, iv. 125
  ―――― times, iii. 264
  ―――― victory at Camelford, iii. 322
  Saxons, i. 195, 305, 334 _quat._, 326, 337 _bis_, 338, 342 _bis_,
    404――ii. 127――iii. 284, 365 _bis_.――Landed at Perthsasnac, ii. 165.
    Their castles 423. Battle with the Britons 403.――Defeated by St.
    David, iii. 293.――Their settlement in Cornwall, iv. 125
  Say, William, Lord, ii. 379
  Sayer family, iii. 212, 215
  Scandinavians, i. 341――ii. 248
  Scawen, i. 392.――Family, ii. 67. Arms 68.――Thomas, iii. 318, 319.
    Sir William 268, 271, 317. Mr. 271, 355. William, his observations
    on the Cornish MS. Passio Christi, App. V. iv. 190. His dissertation
    on the Cornish tongue 193 to 221
  ―――― of Millinike, William, ii. 67
  Scawn, i. 20
  Schobells, ii. 281
  Sciffo, Phavorino and Hortulana, i. 175
  Scilly Islands or Isles, i. 139, 198, 199――ii. 213, 237, 283
    _ter._――iii. 429, 430 _bis_, 431, 433.――Governor and gunners
    pensioned, ii. 278. Sir John Grenville, governor 345. Lighthouse on
    St. Agnes 358.――Etymology, iii. 430 _bis_. Reduced by Athelstan 322.
    Garrison at 289.――List of, iv. 230
  SCILLY ISLANDS, by the Editor, unnoticed by Hals and Tonkin,
    frequented by the ancients for tin, called the ancient
    Cassiterides by mistake, fable of the Lioness country, exaggerated
    opinion of the ancients, Scilly isles mistaken by them for
    England, iv. 168. Monastery, grant to Tavistock abbey and its
    confirmation 169. A second 170. Letter from Edward 3rd, his camp
    in Enmoor, only two monks resident, agreement for their exchange
    for secular priests, tithes impropriated, St. Nicholas convent on
    Trescow island, remains visible, St. Nicholas the patron of
    mariners 171; and of infants, miracle working by his relics, the
    islands important in the Civil Wars, patriotism of the cavaliers,
    system of annual leasing injurious to the islands 172. Now let on
    lives with condition of improving the harbour, expectations formed
    from Mr. Smith, Lighthouse on St. Agnes, suggestion for one on the
    Wolf 173. Wrecks formerly much more frequent than now, loss of the
    Victory, Geology, rocks insignificant, no legendary history or
    peculiarity of manners, their names, speculations upon them 174.
    Vigilance in the customs, produce, resort of ships, Dr. Borlase on
    their druidical antiquities, population, improvement of police and
    justice 175. Appointment of magistrates, situation of St. Agnes
    lighthouse, high water 176
  Scipio Africanus, iii. 106.――His remark on the fall of Carthage, ii. 426
  Scobell, i. 45 _bis_, 46, 255. Barbara 259 _bis_. Francis 44, 417,
    418. Francis, M.P., 416. Mary 259. Richard 44, 259 _bis_. Arms
    44.――Francis, iii. 381. Mr. and family 88
  ―――― of Menagwins, Mary and Richard, i. 257.――In St. Austell, ii.
    217 _bis_
  ―――― of Rosillian, Henry, i. 53
  ―――― of St. Austell, i. 53
  Scobhall of Devon, arms, i. 44
  Scornier, account of, ii. 134
  Scotland, i. 336――iv. 75.――Union with, i. 126.――St. German travelled
    through and preached there, ii. 65. The Eliots originated from 66.
    The Duke of Braciano came to 371
  ―――― church of, iii. 300
  Scots, King, ii. 371
  ―――― wars, iv. 75
  Scott, Sir Walter, a quotation from, ii. 214. He has given
    popularity to the word foray 165
  Scottish tongue, iii. 114
  Scripture, Jewish, contains no reference to a future existence, book
    of Job excepted, iii. 69
  Scrope, Elizabeth and Sir Richard, ii. 185.――Richard and William,
    Lords of Bolton castle, iii. 129. Arms ibid. 130. Their contest with
    Carmynow for them 129
  Scrope and Grosvenor Roll, iii. 138
  Scylley Isles, by Leland, iv. 266, 285
  Sea trout, iii. 442
  Seaborn, Anne and Mr. of Bristol, ii. 270
  Seaford, relics at, iii. 33
  Seaforth, i. 47
  Searell, Allen, i. 2
  Searle family and arms, i. 37.――Mr. iv. 98
  Seaton river, iii. 118, 119
  Seawen, i. 397
  Sebaste, i. 52
  Sebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Seccombe of Pelsew, William, and arms, i. 417
  Sechell, Rev. Mr. of St. Just and Sancreed, iii. 427
  Segar, William, ii. 192
  Selborne, and its vicar, Mr. White, iii. 206
  Selby abbey, ii. 75
  Selybria in Greece, ii. 366
  Senan, St. an Irishman, his life by Dr. Butler, friend of St. David,
    founded a monastery, was a bishop, died the same day as St. David,
    notice of him, iii. 431. His day 431, and 434
  Senate of Rome, i. 334
  Seneca, iv. 87
  Seneschale family, ii. 139
  ―――― of Holland, Bernard, John de, and Luke, ii. 93
  Sennan, St. a Persian, exposed to wild beasts, and at last killed by
    gladiators, iii. 434
  ―――― St. parish, i. 198――ii. 282
  Sennen, Sennon or Sennor parish, i. 138, 139――iii. 30, 78
  SENNEN parish, or ST. SENNEN, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    ancient name, value, land tax, painted images hid in the wall,
    inscription on font, iii. 428. Penros, Trevear, parish yields
    little wheat, but plenty of barley, Chapel Carne Braye 429.
    Dangerous rocks, spire thrown down, erected by the Romans, or by
    King Athelstan, and Marogeth Arvowed 430. Penryn-Penwid, Land’s
    End 431. By Tonkin, St. Sennan, daughter church to Burian. By the
    Editor, most western parish in England ibid. No granite on the
    cliff except near Land’s End, magnificent scene, Longships,
    light-house upon, communication interrupted sometimes for three
    months, latitude and longitude of Land’s End, church conspicuous,
    built of granite, monuments, inn 432. Its appropriate
    inscriptions, Mean village, tradition and prophecy attached to a
    flat rock here, Whitsand bay, things said to have landed here,
    parish fertile, variety of measures, difference of the mile in
    England and Ireland 433. English and Irish acre, history of St.
    Sennen, another St. Senan, his Life by Dr. Butler 434. Parish
    feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, sand in Whitsand bay,
    drifted as far as Sennen green 435
  Senns, i. 214
  Sepulchre of our Saviour, ii. 414
  Sereod, Sir Thomas, M.P. for Cornwall, iii. 165
  Sergeaulx, Sir Richard and his heirs, iii. 65.――Richard, iv. 21 and
    22. Sir Richard and three Misses 22. Family 21
  Sergiopolis, iv. 100
  Sergius, St. iv. 111. His history, the place of his martyrdom named
    Sergiopolis 100
  ―――― and Bacchus, Saints, Abbey at Angiers, iii. 232 _bis_――iv. 100, 105
  Sergreaulx, i. 264. Alice 262 _quat._ Richard 264. Sir Richard
    262.――Sir Richard, ii. 181. Family ibid. 182
  Serischall, Bartholomew, Margery and arms, iii. 225
  Seriseaux, Richard de, ii. 398
  ―――― arms, iii. 225
  Serjeant, Rev. John, i. 381
  Serjeaux family, iii. 258
  Serman, St. iv. 14
  Serpeknol, iv. 153
  Serpents, petrified, invariably wanted a head, ii. 298
  Sescombe of St. Kevorne, i. 313
  Seven Oaks, Kent, iv. 87 _bis_
  Seven years’ war, ii. 32, 245
  Severn channel, iv. 15
  ―――― river, iii. 298
  ―――― sea, iii. 331
  Seville, i. 161
  ―――― Bishop of, i. 82
  Seviock, iii. 374
  Seymour, Lord Hugh, cruised from Falmouth, ii. 18
  ―――― Charles Duke of Somerset, and Lady Elizabeth 460. Colonel H.
    iii. 231.――Edward, Duke of Somerset and protector, iv. 107
  ―――― of Bury Pomeroye, Sir Edward, i. 416
  Seyne fishing for pilchards, ii. 262
  Seyntaubyn, or Seynt Aubyn, i. 136, 261, 317, 318, 319, 414. Mr.
    265. Sir John, Bart. 121, 261 _bis_, 266 _ter._, 268, 271, 277, 350,
    417, 418. His address to the parish of Crowan on the outrage at
    Skewis 284. Charity schools endowed by 288. Thomas 261. Family
    monuments in Crowan church 288――ii. 160 _bis_. Ann 5. Catherine 199.
    Geoffrey, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir Guy 181, 183, 395. John 213,
    _quin._, 354. Sir John 5, 176, 199 _bis_, 213, 214, 243. Margaret
    243. Margery 354.――St. Aubin, or St. Aubyn, Francis, iii. 80. John
    83. Rev. R. T. of Ruan Minor 424. Miss 133. Mr. a pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53.――Sir John, iv. 73, 139. Mr. 22. Family 107
  ―――― of Clanawar, Colonel John, i. 113
  ―――― of Clowance, i. 261, 262, 263. Geoffrey 265. Sir Guy 261, 262,
    263, 265. John 262 _bis_. Sir John 262 _ter._, 263, 265. Thomas 262
    _bis_. Arms 262.――Geoffrey, ii. 385. John 122.――John, iii. 81, 317.
    Sir John 317, 318, 319. Thomas 211. Mr. 65.――Of Clowans, Colonel
    John, iv. 188
  ―――― of Crowan, i. 360
  ―――― of Trekininge, Sir John, i. 216
  Shaftesbury, ii. 26
  ―――― Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl of, ii. 379
  Shakespeare, iv. 119
  Shakspeare of Pendarves, John, iii. 311
  Shannon river, iii. 434
  Shapcott, of Elton, Thomas, i. 170
  Shapter, Rev. Mr. ii. 106
  Sharp Tor, or Sharpy Torry, i. 189, _ter._――iii. 45.――Description
    of, i. 187
  Sheen Priory, Richmond, ii. 190
  Sheepshanks, Rev. Mr. ii. 105. His character 104
  Shell work, extraordinary, i. 147
  Shepard, Elizabeth, i. 222
  Shepherds, iii. 273. Origin of the name 272
  Sherborne manor, ii. 7
  Sheriff of Cornwall violently resisted in the execution of his duty
    by Henry Rogers at Skewis, i. 268
  ―――― Thady, iv. 116
  Sheviock barton, iii. 436
  ―――― manor, ii. 362――iii. 437
  ―――― parish, i. 32――ii. 250. Or Shevyock 59
  SHEVIOCK parish, by Hals, situation and boundaries, value of
    benefice, land tax, endowment of the church, Dawnay family, iii.
    436. By Tonkin, a rectory, value, patron, incumbent, Sheviock manor
    437. By the Editor, church old, splendid monuments 438. Tale of the
    building of the church and a barn, advowson, Crofthole village, its
    situation, Porth Wrinkle 439. Trethel, statistics, rector, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 440
  Shillingham, iii. 464. Account of 463
  ―――― of Shillingham family, iii. 463
  Shipmoney, iii. 144 _bis_, 152
  Shipwreck, extraordinary, ii. 320
  Shoreham, i. 258
  Short, Charles, of Devon, ii. 218
  Shovel, Sir Cloudesley, iv. 174
  Shrewsbury, ii. 76. St. Chad, patron of 391
  ―――― Richard of, i. 88
  Shropshire, the Cornwalls twenty-two times sheriffs of, iii. 449
  Shuckburgh, Richard, i. 355.――Sir George. His Tables, iv. 145
  ―――― of Shuckburgh, i. 355
  Sibthorpe, i. 358
  Sibthorpia Europæa, iv. 180
  Siddenham, South, ii. 430
  Sidenham, Cuthbert and Humphrey, iv. 77
  Sidney, Sir Philip, Sir Beville Grenville was his rival, ii. 348
  Sigdon, ii. 71
  Sigebert, King of the East Angles, ii. 284
  Signals, from Maker church, iii. 106. Remarks on ibid.
  Silly, William, i. 223.――Mrs. ii. 136.――Elizabeth and Joseph, iii. 66
  ―――― of Minver and St. Wenn, John, iii. 237. Family 66. Arms 237
  ―――― of Trevella, Hender, iii. 237. William 237, 238
  Sillye, heir of, iv. 111
  Siloam, tower of, iii. 422
  Silvester, Pope, i. 237
  Simmons, George, iii. 215
  Simon’s, St. and St. Jude’s day, ii. 140
  Simon Ward or St. Breward parish, i. 62, 131――iv. 97
  Simpson, John, iii. 206
  Sion Abbey, ii. 176. Middlesex 209, 212 _bis_
  Sirius, its parallax ascertained by Dr. Maskelyne, ii. 222
  Sisters, the nine, iv. 2
  Sithian, St. Bertin, Abbot of, iv. 157
  Sithney parish, ii. 136, 141, 155, 156, 160. St. John’s hospital at
    157――iii. 419, 421.――Its governor, iv. 1.――Near Helston, singular
    tale of a fair removed from, iii. 309
  SITHNEY parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriator, land tax, St. John’s
    hospital, a deficiency in the MS. iii. 441. Trout, royalty of the
    river, Trevelle’s tenure 442. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name
    ibid. A vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, impropriation, Penrose
    manor, its situation, Loo Pool, its trout, sandbank, used as a
    bridge, its danger, Mr. Penrose’s house, name of the river 443. The
    bar, the fish of the pool 444. By the Editor, distance of the church
    from Breage church, divided by a valley, attempt to make a harbour
    of Porthleaven ibid. Has failed, Penrose, improvements expected,
    Antron 445. Trevarnoe, St. John’s hospital, stone pointing out its
    site, impropriation of the tithes, present and a former incumbent
    446. Parish feast, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase, form of the
    parish, Whele Vor 447
  Sixtus 5th, Pope, ii. 371 _bis_
  Skelton, ii. 186
  Skewish, Great, iv. 141
  ―――― Miss, iii. 147.――Collan and family, iv. 2
  Skewys, i. 267 _bis_, 272, 303
  ―――― of Skewys, John, i. 303
  Skidmore, Thomas, ii. 196
  Skinden, account of, ii. 338
  Skippon, Major General, i. 114 _bis_――iv. 188. His men distressed on
    their march, and charged by the King’s troops ibid. Commissioner for
    the parliament army 189
  Skyburiow, Miss, iii. 134
  Slade of Lanewa, George, i. 418
  ―――― of Trevennen, Simon, iii. 202 _bis_, and William 202
  Slancombe Dawney, i. 64
  Slannen, i. 347, 370
  Slanning, Sir Nicholas of Marstow, Devon, governor of Pendennis
    castle. Killed at the battle of Bristol against the rebels, and the
    marriage of his widow, ii. 13.――Sir Nicholas, Bart. iii. 76. Sir
    Nicholas of Marystow, Devon 75, 76. Arms 76
  Slapton, college of, Devon, iii. 352
  Slate from Drillavale quarry, the best in England, iv. 45
  Sloane’s, Sir Hans, MSS. iii. 154
  Slugg, John, ii. 189
  Small, i. 317
  Smeaton, Mr. ii. 264. Built the present Eddystone lighthouse 378
    _quat._, 432
  Smith, i. 78, 117.――Walter, ii. 70.――William, Bishop of Litchfield,
    afterwards of Lincoln, iii. 141――i. 218.――Mr. has taken a lease of
    the Scilly isles, iv. 173. Name 128
  ―――― of Crantock, Sir James, i. 250. Sir William 249. Arms 250
  ―――― of Devon, George and Grace, ii. 347
  ―――― of Exon, i. 250. Sir James 348
  ―――― of Kent, John, ii. 379
  ―――― of Mitchell Morton family, ii. 416
  ―――― of Trelizicke, i. 348
  ―――― of Trethewoll, i. 408
  ――――’s, ii. 154
  Smithfield, execution in, ii. 192
  Smithick or Smithike, British name of Falmouth, ii. 20. Changed 8.
    Town and custom-house built 9
  Smithson, Sir Hugh, Duke of Northumberland, iii. 460
  Smyrna, iii. 187.――Rev. E. Nankivell, chaplain to the factory at,
    iv. 5
  Smyth, Rev. T. S. i. 49.――Rev. John, curate of St. Just, notice of,
    ii. 286. Monument, inscription, and cenotaph 287
  Snell, Rev. Mr. of Menheniot, iii. 168
  ―――― of Whilley, Elizabeth, iii. 160
  Soaprock, account of, ii. 360
  Sobieski, John, the preserver of Christendom, ii. 351
  Society, Antiquarian, ii. 224
  ―――― for propagating the Gospel, iii. 73
  ―――― Royal, ii. 224
  Solenny, Hostulus De, iv. 25, 26 _quat._ John 26 _ter._
  Solinus, i. 199
  Solomon, Duke of Cornwall, i. 294
  Somaster of Painsford, Devon, John and Marianne, ii. 304
  Somers, Lord, iii. 15
  Somerset, Duke of, i. 169 _quat._――ii. 182.――Charles Seymour, iii.
    460. John 65.――Edward Seymour, Protector, iv. 107
  Somersetshire, i. 113――ii. 110, 190, 293. Romantic scenery of
    88.――Insurgents enter, i. 86.――King Charles in, marched out of, iv.
    185. The Trevelyans sheriffs of 114
  Sondry, Thomas, iii. 387
  Sophocles, ii. 103, 165
  Sound, the English fleet sailed for, ii. 27
  South Downs, iii. 10
  ―――― Saxons, Cissa, King of, ii. 284
  ―――― Sea islands, iv. 45
  Southallington manor, i. 64
  Southampton, ii. 76
  Southernay, i. 108
  Southey’s lines upon St. Keyne’s well, ii. 295
  Southill parish, i. 151 _bis_――ii. 309 _bis_――iii. 43――iv. 6, 7
  SOUTHILL parish. See _Hill, South_
  South Teign, i. 170
  Sowle, i. 47
  Spain, i. 161 _ter._――ii. 107――iii. 187, 361――iv. 86.――Coast of,
    iii. 218.――Tobacco sold cheap in, ii. 43. War with 245. Her fleet
    ibid. Appeared in Plymouth Sound 246. Officers lost returning from
    325.――Elizabeth’s wars with, iii. 105.――Trade of Looe with, iv. 35
  Spaniards, ii. 6.――Invasion of Britain by, their name hated at
    Mousehole, iii. 287.――And French, sea-fight with, iv. 21
  Spanish galleons, Sir Richard Grenville sent in the Revenge to
    intercept, ii. 344
  ―――― galleys, five, burnt Penzance, iii. 81, 91
  ―――― merchants murdered, ii. 6
  ―――― pieces, ii. 6
  ―――― vessel wrecked, iii. 311
  ―――― wars, story of, ii. 6
  Spark of Plymouth, i. 370
  Sparks family, ii. 357
  Speaker of the House of Commons, ii. 68.――Speakers, Hakewell’s
    Catalogue of, iv. 44
  Speccott, i. 221. Sir John 381 _bis_. Arms 379.――Family, ii. 398,
    400.――Mr. iii. 449. His death 450
  ―――― of Penheale, John, i. 378 _bis_. Hon. John 378, 379. Seized
    with small pox the day after his marriage 379. His death and will
    ibid.――John and Colonel, ii. 399.――Of Penheel, John, iii. 38
  Speed, i. 217――iii. 111, 441――iv. 101; and Dugdale’s Monast. Anglic.
    i. 247――ii. 62, 96――iv. 101
  Spelman’s Glossary, iii. 389
  Spencer of Lancaster, i. 263
  Spernon, i. 127
  Sperrack of Trigantan, i. 258
  Spettigue, Rev. Edward of Michaelstow, iii. 223.――John, iv. 62
  Spigurnel, Henry, iii. 2
  Spinster’s town, iv. 140
  Spour family, ii. 227, 229. Henry, Miss, and arms 227
  Spoure of Trebartha, Edmund, and Mary, ii. 396.――Family, i. 302, 303
  Spry, Edward, iii. 378. Sir. J. T. and Admiral 446. Miss 66. Family
    194, 449. Line upon 449
  ―――― or Sprye of Tregony, Peter and his daughter, iii. 77. Miss 75
  Sprye, A. G. i. 28. Rev. William 106. Arms and etymology of name
    28.――Samuel Thomas, M.P. for Bodmin, ii. 35. Admiral 34.――Family, i.
    29, 61 _ter._――ii. 54, 300
  ―――― of Blissland, i. 28
  Spur, Mr. ii. 120
  Spye, derivation of name, i. 28
  Squire, Arthur, ii. 377
  Stabback, Rev. Thomas, i. 293.――Rev. Samuel of Sancreed, iii. 427
  Stackenoe, iv. 1
  Stackhouse, Mrs. i. 400. Edward William 401. Rev. Thomas, author of
    the History of the Bible 400. John 163 _ter._, 400 _bis_. William
    400. Dr. William 163, 400 _bis_.――John, iii. 367 _bis_. Thomas of
    Beenham, Berks 366. His works ibid. Rev. Dr. William, rector of St.
    Erme ibid. _bis_. William 367 _bis_
  Stadyon, ii. 139
  Stafford, Baron of, ii. 230. Baronial family 231
  ―――― county, ii. 89
  ―――― Humphrey, i. 64.――Edmund, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 446. Family 117
  Stainton, Henry De, iii. 2
  Stamford, Earl of, governor of Plymouth, iii. 183. Defeated 351
  ―――― hill, iii. 351
  ―――― creek, iii. 256
  Stanbury, iii. 255
  ―――― family, iii. 350
  ―――― of Stanbury, Richard or John, Bishop of Hereford, family and
    their property, iii. 255
  Stancomb Dawney, iii. 436
  Stanhope, i. 61. Hon. and Rev. H., 149
  Stannaries, laws relating to, i. 365.――Records of, iii. 57.――Earl of
    Radnor, Lord Warden of, ii. 380.――John Thomas, Vice Warden of, iv. 91
  Starford, William, i. 108
  Stawel, Edward Lord, H. B. Legge, Lord, H. S. B. Legge, Lord, and
    Mary, iii. 206
  Stawell, John, ii. 196
  Steam boats, discovery anticipated, iv. 91
  ―――― engine, the first used in Cornwall, i. 127
  Stebens, Rev. R. S. of South Petherwin, iii. 338
  Stephen, King, ii. 87――iii. 433, 456 _bis_, 463――iv. 81, 82, 140
  ―――― prior of Launceston, ii. 419
  ―――― St. the protomartyr, iii. 450, 456
  ―――― St. by Leland, iv. 292
  ―――― St. cum Tresmore, ii. 430
  ―――― ’s, St. abbey, dissolution of, iv. 68
  ―――― St. altar in Dublin cathedral, iv. 146
  ―――― St. chapel in Dublin cathedral, iv. 147
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. college, by Launceston, i. 112――iv. 185.――Prior of, i. 378
    _bis_
  ―――― St. collegiate church, suppressed, ii. 419. Ralph, Dean of 426.
    Prior of 422
  ―――― St. parish, i. 103, 128, 140, 251, 310――iii. 195, 207, 335, 354
    _bis_, 395――iv. 152
  Stephen’s, St. by Leland, iv. 281
  ―――― St. in Brannel church, iii. 198. The advowson 202
  ――――’s St. in Brannel or Branwell parish, i. 310――ii. 109, 110,
    353――iv. 54
  STEPHEN’S, ST. in BRANNEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    value of benefice, consolidation with St. Denis, and Carhayes,
    endowment, patron, incumbent, land tax, court, iii. 448. Bodenike,
    the love adventures of Mr. Tanner and Mrs. Windham 449. By Tonkin,
    situation and boundaries, dedication, daughter to Carhayes, value,
    patron, incumbent 450. Manor of Brannel 451. Whitaker, singular
    constitution of the parish, manor of Carhayes supposed a royal one
    451. Name and appearance of the house confirm the supposition 452.
    St. Denis parochiated, Carhayes not mentioned in Pope Nicholas’s
    valor 453. By Editor, church stands high, lofty tower, potatoe
    cultivation, monument in church to Dr. Hugh Wolrige with epitaph,
    statistics, fluctuation in mining, china clay, Geology by Dr. Boase
    454. China stone and clay, quantities exported from Cornwall 455
  ―――― St. by Launceston parish, ii. 361, 417, 419, 420――iii. 466
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near LAUNCESTON parish, by Hals, situation,
    boundaries, collegiate church, converted into a priory, iii. 456.
    Impropriated all the benefices annexed to it, land tax, fairs, a
    friary 457. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice 457.
    By Editor, early history indistinct, college changed into a
    monastery, St. Thomas’s church, etymology of Launceston, the church
    seated high with a lofty tower, inscription to Viscount Newhaven,
    Sir Jonathan Phillips 458. Barton of Carnedon, modern history of the
    parish, borough of Newport, its constitution, Werrington 459. Its
    deer park 460. Fairs, Sarah Coat, aged 104. Statistics, incumbent,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 461
  ――――’s, St. by Launceston, prior of, iv. 51, 59, 63 _bis_, 68
  ―――― St. in Lesnewith, iv. 63
  ―――― St. in Penwith, iv. 50, 51 _quat._
  ―――― St. by Saltash parish, i. 199, 203――ii. 8, 110.――Sheet of
    Hals’s MS. relating to, communicated to the Editor, iv. 184
  STEPHEN’S, ST. near SALTASH, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries,
    iii. 461. Ancient name, value of benefice, castle, honour, and
    manor, of Trematon, their history 462. Shillingham, etymology,
    Buller family, treachery of a domestic chaplain 463. Fentongollan
    reluctantly sold to raise the amount of a fine 464. Earth,
    Wyvillecomb 465. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, a vicarge, its
    value, &c. ibid. By the Editor 466. Statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 470
  ―――― St. point, i. 381, 386
  ―――― St. rectory, i. 72
  Stephens family, i. 84 _bis_, 121 _bis_――ii. 43, 77, 80, 269――iv.
    67.――Rev. Edward, ii. 338. Samuel 215. Mr. 134, 259.――Rev. Darell,
    of Little Petherick, iii. 335. Rev. D. of Maker 109. John 48, 387.
    Rev. Mr. 240. Mrs. 8.――Nicholas, iv. 77
  ―――― of Culverhouse near Exeter, Richard, iv. 67
  ―――― of St. Ives, John, i. 353, 354, 392, 399 _bis_, 403. Samuel
    403.――Family escaped the plague, ii. 271. Anne, Augustus, Harriet
    270. John 269 _ter._, 270 _bis_, Maria 270. Samuel 270 _quin._
  ―――― of Tregenna, Samuel, i. 392, 403.――Mr. ii. 354.――In St. Ives,
    Rev. J. iii. 54. Samuel 440
  ―――― of Tregorne, Mr. iii. 311
  Stepney, iii. 188
  Stepper point, iii. 281, 282
  Sternhold, Thomas, i. 96――iii. 238
  Stevens family, iii. 192
  Steward, Lord, ii. 68
  Stidio, Bishop of Cornwall, ii. 60, 61――iii. 415
  Stithian parish, i. 221, 236.――Stithians, ii. 129, 140.――Stithyans
    or St. Stithians, iii. 59, 305, 380
  ―――― St. iv. 2
  ――――’s St. church, iv. 4
  STITHIAN’S, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient
    name, mother church to Peranwell, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, land tax, impropriation, saint, iv. 1. Penaluricke
    barton and manor, Tretheage, the nine maids, tin 2. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage ibid. Patron,
    impropriation, incumbent, manor of Tretheage 3. By Editor, church
    and tower, manors of Kennal and Roseeth, barton of Tretheage ibid.
    Penalurick, Treweek, Tresavren, Trevales, the church, charter of
    Edmund Earl of Cornwall 4. Value of the benefice, late vicar,
    statistics, present vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 5
  Stithiany, ii. 136
  Stock, D. J. E. his Life of Dr. Beddoes, iii. 251
  Stoke, i. 266.――Meaning of, iv. 7
  ―――― Climsland, i. 151, 153 _bis_――ii. 229, 230, 309――iii. 40, 43
  ―――― Climsland, or Stow Climsland manor, iv. 6, 7, 11
  STOKE CLIMSLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, manor, writ,
    Hengiston downs, tin works, part of Cari Bollock, iv. 6. Manor of
    Rileaton, writ, benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax. By Tonkin and
    Whitaker, situation and boundaries, value, patron, incumbent, manor
    of Climsland 7. Cary Bullock park, etymology 8. By the Editor, manor
    of Stoke Climsland, and Climsland prior, Carybullock, Whiteford, Mr.
    Call, memoir of 9. Afterwards Sir John, Sir W. P. Call, manor of
    Climsland prior, advowson 11. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 12
  ―――― Damerel, i. 266
  ―――― Damerell parish, iv. 39
  ―――― Gabriel church, i. 367
  ―――― Gabriel vicarage, i. 130
  Stone, advowson, iii. 115
  ―――― of Bundbury, Wilts, James, i. 259
  Stonehouse, west, now Mount Edgecombe, iii. 107
  Stones, circles of, i. 141
  Storm which destroyed Eddystone lighthouse, iii. 376.――At Gwenap,
    ii. 132
  Stourton, Lord, iii. 357. His daughter 369
  Stow’s History of England, iii. 310
  Stowe, in Bucks, carvings from Stowe in Cornwall, transferred to,
    ii. 346, 351
  ―――― in Kilkhampton, ii. 340. Etymology 232. The Grenvilles resided
    there for many generations 344. Mansion built by John, Earl of Bath
    346, 351. The noblest house in the west of England 346. Demolished,
    materials sold, wainscot of the chapel sold to Lord Cobham, and
    transferred to Stowe, Bucks 346, 351. Magnificence and situation
    346. The carving of the chapel by Mr. Chuke, ib. Built at the
    national expence, almost all the gentlemen’s seats in Cornwall
    embellished from 351.――Staircase from, iii. 279. Spoils of 351
  Stowell, Sir John, ii. 233.――William, iii. 358
  Stradling, Ann, iii. 316. Edmund 316 _bis_
  ―――― of Dunlevy, Edmund, iii. 211
  Strange, Nicholas, i. 246
  Strathan, or Stratton hundred, iii. 22, 114, 254, 349
  Straton, i. 60
  Stratone, iv. 1
  Stratton hundred, i. 133――ii. 232 340, 402, 413――iv. 12, 15, 39, 40,
    131, 152 _bis_.――Bailiffry of, ii. 416
  ―――― manor, ii. 427――iv. 15, 16 _bis_
  ―――― parish, ii. 273, 340, 413, 416, 429, 430――iii. 114, 274, 349,
    352. Roman road through 324.――Battle at, ii. 349.――Victory, i. 113
  STRATTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    iv. 12. Patron, land tax, market, Thurlebere, battle in the
    rebellion, Sir B. Grenville unhorsed 13. Chudleigh taken prisoner,
    royal party victorious, with a loss of 200, took 17 guns, subsequent
    fertility of the field, Sir Ralph Hopton and his ancestry 14. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, Roman way, value of benefice, a
    vicarage, patron, manor 15. Its value 16. By Editor, former road
    through Stratton and Binomy manors, manor of Efford, church and
    tower ibid. Great age of Elizabeth Cornish, the tithes, manor of
    Sanctuary changed for the honour of Wallingford, Bude, jetty, canal
    efficacy of shell-sand as manure, boats used with wheels, Fulton’s
    improvement of canal navigation 17. A watering place, Launcells
    house, G. B. Kingdon, Esq. instance of longevity, bells, height of
    Hennacleve cliff 18. Statistics, vicar, Geology by Dr. Boase 19
  Straughan, Colonel, challenged the King’s army, his troop led by
    himself, iv. 186. Challenge accepted, his orders, and charge, took
    some of the King’s horses 187
  Street, John, accomplice with Rogers, convicted and executed, i.
    269. His trial for the murder of Carpenter 272. For that of
    Woolston 276
  ―――― Nowan, iii. 288
  Stretch of Devon, Lord of Pinhoe, iv. 43
  Strettoun, by Leland, iv. 258
  Stribble hill, i. 223
  Strode, Richard, ii. 231
  Stroote, i. 348
  Stukeley, i. 141
  Styria, iii. 186
  Subterranean vault at Trove, i. 143
  “Sudeley Castle, History of,” iii. 160
  Suffolk, ii. 66
  ―――― Duke of, iv. 107.――Henry Grey, ii. 294 _bis_
  ―――― Earl of, iii. 154.――Edmund de la Pole, i. 86
  Sulpicius, St. iii. 122
  Sumaster, ii. 71
  Summercourt, i. 388 _bis_
  Sunderland, Earl of, i. 84 _bis_, 126. Charles Spencer 127
  ―――― man of war, ii. 32――iii. 186
  Surat, ii. 227――iii. 188
  Surrey, iii. 10
  ―――― Thomas Holland, Duke of, iii. 27
  Surrius’s book, i. 214
  Surtecote, Angero de, iv. 27
  Survey of Cornwall, iii. 437――iv. 68, 100, 139, 156. Of the Duchy of
    Cornwall 6
  Sussex county, iii. 206 _bis_. Weald of 10
  Sutherland, i. 349, 350, 359
  Sutton, Rev. Henry, ii. 409.――Rev. William of St. Michael Carhayes,
    and St. Stephen’s in Brannel, iii. 450
  Swallock, i. 131
  Swannacot manor, iv. 136
  Swanpool, i. 137, 138
  Swansea, i. 364――ii. 241
  ―――― coal sent to Cornwall, iii. 340
  Sweden, King of, ii. 27. Bestows medals on English officers ibid.
  Sweet, i. 417.――Rev. Charles, iii. 38
  ―――― of Kentisbury, Rev. Charles 381
  Swift, Jonathan, Dean of St. Patrick’s, i. 58.――Restored Archbishop
    Tregury’s tomb, iv. 141, 144, 147
  Swimmer, Robert, ii. 70
  Swiss cantons, had a custom of trying after execution, iii. 186
  Swithin, St. ii. 403
  Switzerland, iii. 231
  Sydemon, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Sydenham, Devon, iii. 126
  Sydney Sussex college, Cambridge, iv. 136 _bis_
  Sylea island, iv. 230
  Symmonds, Rev. John, ii. 116
  Symonds, Rev. Mr. i. 353, 354
  Symons, William, i. 105, 107.――Rev. Mr. ii. 116.――Rev. J. T. of
    Trevalga, iv. 67. Family 62
  ―――― of Halt, i. 162
  Symonward, iv. 49
  Symphorian, two saints of the name, iv. 117, 120
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 258
  Symphrogia, St. iv. 117
  Syriac, St. iv. 111, 112
  Syrian castles, ii. 423
  Sythany, i. 261
  Sythney, hospital of the Knights of St. John at, iii. 78
  Syth’s, St. ii. 405

  “Tables of the Greek Language,” iv. 87
  Tacabere, i. 133, 134 _bis_
  Tacitus, i. 256――iii. 162
  Tagus, i. 372
  Talbot, William, iv. 28. Family 145
  Talcare, i. 20――iv. 24
  Talgrogan, i. 17
  Talland, ii. 430 _bis_. Tallant 398. Talland, Tallant, or Tallend
    parish, iii. 65, 249, 291, 294
  TALLAND parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    land tax, etymology, iv. 19. West Looe, borough and town 20.
    Killygarth barton and manor 21. Hendarsike 22. Trenake 23. By
    Tonkin and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, a vicarage, value,
    impropriation, patron, incumbent, Polpera ibid. Porth Tallant,
    manor, etymology, the church, story of Mr. Murth and his French
    miller 24. By the Editor, additions from Bond relating to West
    Looe, in the hamlet of Lemain, barton of Port Looe, Lammana,
    description of the chapel 25. Grants relating to the monastery 26,
    27. Midmain rock, Horestone rock, Portnadle bay, corporation of
    West Looe 28. West Looe down, Giant’s hedge, St. Winnow down 29.
    Romans directed their roads to Fords, Causey from Leskeard to Looe
    30. Two circular encampments, described, Berry park 31. Prospects,
    five barrows, grave discovered, a celt found 32. Some in the
    British Museum, gold chain and brass instruments found, Polvellan
    33. Inclosure of the down desirable 34. Property in it, lettings
    35. Trade of Looe, church, Beville monument, Polbenro, beauty of
    the road from Fowey to Looe, Killigarth manor, Kilmenawth, or
    Kelmenorth, hamlet of Lemaine, extract from an old record 36.
    Portlooe, Looe island, Polvellan, Greek inscription, Admiral Wager
    37. Killygarth, Polperro, advowson, statistics, incumbent,
    impropriation, Geology by Dr. Boase 38
  Talland town, iv. 36
  Tallard, Marshall, ii. 307 _bis_
  Tallat, Captain, iii. 187
  Talmeneth, by Leland, iv. 264
  Tamalanc, i. 2
  Tamar river, i. 107, 113, 133 _bis_, 266, 310――ii. 362, 364, 413,
    418 _bis_, 432――iii. 1, 40, 45, 104, 114, 121, 166, 254 _bis_, 298,
    301, 456, 457, 461――iv. 6, 7, 15, 39 _bis_, 40 _ter._, 70, 152,
    185.――Romantic, iii. 42. Its banks 460.――The country adjacent to,
    may be proud of Mr. Call, iv. 9
  Tamara, the Roman, iv. 40
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 291
  Tamarix Gallica, iv. 180
  Tamarton, i. 107
  ―――― chapel, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― hundred, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― parish, iv. 131, 152 _bis_
  TAMARTON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Tamar river,
    mentioned by Ptolemy, ancient name of the parish, church recent,
    land tax, manor, iv. 39. Line of a Saxon poet on Athelstan’s victory
    40. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, value of benefice, a
    rectory, incumbent, patron ibid. Manor 41. By Editor, Lysons on the
    descents of property, manor of Hornacott, Ogbere, Vacye, villages of
    Alvacot, Headon, and Venton, statistics, ib. Incumbent, and Geology
    by Dr. Boase 42
  Tamarton parish, Devon, iv. 39
  ―――― north, manor, iv. 41
  Tamerton, i. 241――ii. 430
  Tamerworth harbour, iii. 104, 105
  Tamesworth haven, i. 32
  Tanis, parish of, ii. 208
  Tanner, i. 146, 153 _ter._, 159.――Bishop 200――ii. 201, 246――iii.
    233, 448, 449――iv. 104, 112.――His Notitia Monastica, i. 134, 146,
    250, 251, 300――ii. 209――iv. 102, 104. App. 10. 319 to 336.――John,
    iii. 202, 372, 450. Love story of 449. Rev. Mr. 199. Rev. Mr. of St.
    Stephen’s in Branel 448. Family 198
  ―――― of Carvinike, Anthony, i. 386
  ―――― of Court and Boderick, i. 387
  ―――― of Cullumpton, George, ii. 110
  Taperell, John, iii. 16
  Tapestry at Trewinard, i. 358
  Tarr, Rev. Mr. ii. 251
  Tarsus, iii. 284
  Tassagard, iv. 146
  Tathius, St. notice of, ii. 44
  Taunton, ii. 27, 76, 190, 191.――Insurgents march to, i. 86
  ―――― Richard of Truro, lent Hals’s MS. to the Editor, the son of W.
    E. iii. 18. Richard 407. Family 18
  Tavistock, i. 158, 159
  ―――― Abbey, in Devon, ii. 274――iii. 372, 384, 385, 459, 460――iv. 6,
    64, 169, 171.――Abbot of, ii. 365――iii. 459 _bis_.――Livignus, ii. 60.
    Osbert 426
  ―――― market, i. 79
  ―――― river, source of, iv. 237
  Tawlaght, iv. 146
  Taxatio Benefic. of Pope Nicholas, iii. 5, 24, 40, 112, 277, 291,
    306 _bis_, 334, 336, 339, 345, 352, 372, 374, 384, 396, 437, 442,
    443, 457 _bis_――iv. 15, 23, 40, 44, 62, 66, 76, 95, 112, 118, 129,
    140, 153, 162
  ―――― Eccles. ii. 394 _bis_――iv. 159
  Taxation of Pope Nicholas, iv. 46.――To the Pope’s Annats, ii. 116
  Taylder of St. Mabe, Joan, and Thomas her father, iii. 76
  Taylor, i. 32
  Teague, Mr. i. 254
  Teath, St. parish, i. 375, 382――ii. 401, or Tethe, iv. 95 _bis_,
    99, 137
  TEATH, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, saint, his
    history, iv. 42. Ancient name, value of benefice, land tax,
    Bodanan, the Cheyney family, their monuments and arms in the
    church 43. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a vicarage,
    value, patron, impropriator 44. By the Editor, Lysons gives the
    descent of property, Tregordock manor, Drillavale Quarry,
    Treveares, Captain Bligh of the Bounty 45. Church, age, situation,
    roads, anecdotes of Mr. Phillips, value of benefice 46.
    Statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase, Treburget mine 47
  Tedda, i. 2
  Tees river, i. 290
  Tegleston, i. 1
  Tehidy, ii. 241.――Manor, iii. 380 _bis_, and Honor 384, 388, 389
    _bis_, 390
  Temple bar, iii. 142
  ―――― Rev. Mr. character of, ii. 104
  ―――― manor, iv. 48
  ―――― moors, ii. 36――iv. 46, 48
  ―――― parish, i. 21, 60, 167――iv. 128, 129
  TEMPLE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, Knights
    Templars, ancient name, value of benefice, iv. 48. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, value of benefice 49. By Editor, church
    founded by the Templars ibid. Potatoes cultivated, parish attached
    to the manor of Treleigh, patronage, incumbent, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 50
  Temporibus, John de, iii. 313
  Tencreek, account of, i. 254.――A singular tree there, iii. 169
  ―――― of Tencreek, i. 254, 347 _bis_, 396. Arms 255
  ―――― of Treworgan, i. 206
  Terceira islands, a battle with the Spaniards off, ii. 344
  Terence, notes on, iv. 87
  Tereza, St. iii. 150
  Terrill, Sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186
  Testa, Abbess of Wimborne, iv. 126
  Teth, St. i. 322――iv. 66
  Teucrium latifolia, iv. 183
  ―――― frutescens, iv. 183
  Teuthey, by Leland, iv. 279
  Teutonic ears, name of Winifred not soft enough for, iv. 127
  Tew, St. i. 174
  Tewan, i. 11
  Tewardevi, iv. 93
  Tewington manor, by Hals, i. 41. Antiquity, court leet, etymology
    45. By Tonkin, etymology 46. Possessors, and quarry at 47
  Tewkesbury abbey, i. 288.――Gloucestershire, iv. 140
  ―――― battle of, ii. 260. Sir John Grenville left for dead on the
    field 345
  Teynham, Lord, iii. 140
  Thamar river, iv. 233
  Thames river, iii. 10, 63, 310. High water in 98
  Thanks, i. 37
  Thaumaturgus, Gregory, i. 388
  Theliaus, St. history of, i. 321
  ―――― St. church, i. 321
  Theocritus, by Warton, ii. 266
  Theodore, iv. 8
  Thesdon, a Prince of Cornwall, iii. 342
  Thesdon’s castle, iii. 342
  Thessalonica, principality of, sale of the city to the Venetians,
    ii. 366
  Thetford, ii. 76
  Thica Vosa, an intrenchment, ii. 113
  Thick, Reginald de, i. 383
  Thomas the Rhymer, ii. 308
  Thomas, Henry, i. 277. J. 10. John 19.――Mr. ii. 414.――John and
    Richard took the name of Pendarves, two brothers took that of
    Carnsew, another of Roscrow, and another of Caweth, the arms of all,
    ii. 337.――Andrew, John, his father, and John, iii. 326. John, built
    a house at Chiverton 333. William changed his name to Carnsew 61.
    Miss 333. Family 125. Arms 326.――John, iv. 109 _bis_. John acquired
    a fortune at Truro 90. Rev. Samuel of Truro 76. Miss 117
  ―――― of Glamorganshire, in Wales, Howell and family, iii. 326
  ―――― of Tregamena in Verian, iii. 202
  ―――― of Treon, i. 136
  ―――― St. Apostle and martyr, iv. 50. His day 2
  ―――― St. Aquinas, i. 312
  ―――― St. à Becket, i. 158, or of Canterbury, ii. 73, 96 _bis_,
    156――iv. 1, 50
  ―――― St. church, iii. 458
  ―――― St. parish, St. i. 377――ii. 417, 420――iii. 335, 456, 457, 458
    _bis_
  THOMAS, ST. parish by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, antiquity,
    value of benefice, iv. 50. By Tonkin, boundaries, shape, river
    Kensey 51. By Editor, church small, stands on the site of Launceston
    priory, its remains, well, statistics ibid.――Incumbent, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 52
  Thomas’s, St. street, iv. 51
  Thompson, James, i. 58.――John, ii. 192.――Henry and Rev. J. T., iv. 109
  Thoms, i. 94 _bis_.――Mr. family name changed, and arms, iii. 125
  Thomy, Robert, iii. 125
  Thomye, Robert, iii. 143
  Thorlibear manor, ii. 416
  Thornbury in Devon, iii. 450
  Three Barrows, ii. 317
  Thriades, book of the, i. 338
  Throckmorton, Clement, i. 16
  Throwley, Sir Nicholas, ii. 395
  Thunbergia, Coccinea, iv. 183
  Thunderbolt at St. Michael’s Mount, ii. 199
  Thundering Legion, miracle of, ii. 76
  Thunderstorm, ii. 157
  Thuraken, a Turkish General, ii. 367 _bis_
  Thurigny and Grenville, Robert Fitz Hamon, Lord of, ii. 344, 347
  Thurlebear family, iii. 270
  Thurlebere, account of, iv. 13
  ―――― de, John, family and heiress, iv. 13
  Thynne, Henry Frederick, Lord Carteret heir of the Grenville
    property, and Lord George present possessor of the title and
    estates, ii. 346
  Tiber river, iv. 148
  Tiberius, Emperor, i. 197
  Tide, high, hours of at various ports, iii. 98. Nine hours and half
    flowing from Land’s End to London 99. Extraordinary in 1099, 310
  Tidiford village, ii. 362. Trade at, limestone burnt at 362
  Tidlaton, ii. 427
  Ties, Henry de, ii. 130
  Tilbury, army at, i. 161
  Tillie, Stephen, i. 270, 271 _bis_, 274.――Sir James, iii. 163, 346.
    His extraordinary will 163, 166. Other particulars of him, his arms
    destroyed 166. J. W., 346. Count 166
  Tillie, manor, iv. 55
  Tilly, James, i. 315. Sir James assumed the arms of Count Tilly,
    deprived of them 314. Directions for his funeral 315
  ―――― of Pentilly, James, iii. 44
  Timothy, Epistle to, i. 198, 206
  Tin, fetched by the Greeks from Falmouth harbour, ii. 3. Mode of
    selling in Cornwall 318
  ―――― smelting-house at Treloweth, i. 365. Lamb tin preferred abroad 365
  ―――― stream, of Luxilian, iii. 58
  ―――― works in Stoke Climsland parish, iv. 6
  Tincombe, Mr. iv. 4
  Tindall’s Bible, i. 314
  Tinmouth, John of, iii. 331
  Tinners, St. Perran the patron of, iii. 313
  Tinney Hall, manor, iii. 38
  Tintagel, by Leland, iv. 284
  ―――― castle, by Leland, iv. 259
  Tintagell castle, i. 381――ii. 308, 402.――Seat of the Dukes of
    Cornwall, and birth-place of King Arthur, i. 339. _See Dundagell_
  ―――― parish, ii. 401――iii. 22――iv. 44, 66.――King Arthur’s castle in,
    curious rock, iii. 180. _See Dundagell_
  TINTAGELL parish. _See Dundagell_
  Tinten manor, iv. 97
  Tippet or Tebbot of Callestock Veor, John and family, iii. 321
  ―――― of St. Wen, family, iii. 321
  Tippett, John, iii. 341
  Titanium, a metal discovered in Manaccan parish, iii. 113
  Titus, Emperor, i. 198
  Tiverton, i. 170
  ―――― school, iii. 258
  Toby, i. 282
  Todi in Tuscany, ii. 125
  Todscad, i. 212
  Tol Peder-Penwith, iii. 35, 36. Scenery, accident at 35
  Tolcarne, ii. 48――iii. 232.――Account of, ii. 278
  ―――― or minster, an alien priory, iv. 101
  Tolgoath, i. 415
  Tollays in Redruth and St. Just, iii. 359
  Toller, Mr. ii. 43
  Tollgus manor, iii. 382, 383. Etymology 382. House 383
  Tolskiddy, i. 213
  Tolverne manor, ii. 275, 276, _bis_, 278 _bis_. Henry 8th said to
    have passed two nights at 280
  Tom, Great, of Oxford, inscription upon, iii. 241
  Tombstone at Gunwall, ii. 128
  Tomm, i. 78
  Toms, Miss, iii. 176
  Tonacomb, iii. 255
  Tonkin, Mr. i. 296. James 10. Thomas 8, 9, 10. Rev. Uriah 147.
    Particulars of the family, and monumental inscriptions 12. Arms 9.
    Arms and motto 13.――Hugh, iii. 325. John, his character and adoption
    of Sir Humphrey Davy 94.――Thomas the historian of Cornwall, ii. 75,
    76, 104, 199, 238, 239, 251, 256, 295, 297, 354 _bis_, 381, 383,
    399, 405, 411.――iii. 17, 20, 32, 38, 57, 62, 63, 66, 90, 120, 135,
    177 _bis_, 192 _bis_, 205, 214, 223, 228, 231 _bis_, 238 _bis_, 243,
    245, 261, 274, 302, 313, 314, 318 _bis_, 320, 322, 323, 325, 328,
    366 _bis_, 386, 405, 406, 434, 451.――iv. 24, 25, 62, 65, 76 _bis_,
    78, 120 _ter._, 165.――His Parochial history, iii. 96.――His notion of
    a Danish camp controverted, iv. 78, 80, 81. Does not notice the
    Scilly Isles 168. His etymology of Elerky 119, 120. Whitaker’s
    remarks on it 119.――Rev. Uriah, iii. 7, 94. Vicar of Lelant 88.
    Character of 94. Family 94
  ―――― of Newlyn, iii. 429
  ―――― of Penwenick, Michael, iii. 315 _bis_. His arms 315
  ―――― of Trelevan, Mr. iii. 193
  ―――― of Trenance, near Porthoustock, Mr. ii. 326
  ―――― of Trevannance, Thomas, iii. 358
  Tonkyn, Miss, ii. 255
  ―――― of St. Agnes, i. 234
  ―――― of Hendre, John, i. 234
  ―――― of Trevownas, i. 396
  ―――― of Trewawnance Julian, i. 399. Thomas 399, 400
  Tonsen, i. 254
  Tooke, John, ii. 195
  Tor Point, iii. 121. Road to Leskeard from 439
  Torbay, King William’s landing at, ii. 112. English fleet anchored
    in 247
  Torleh, John, iii. 387
  Torr, Mr. iii. 321
  Tory administration, ii. 245
  Tothill, William, ii. 195
  Totness in Devon, iii. 102, 103
  Tottysdone, ii. 429
  Touche family, ii. 415
  Touchet, James, Lord Audley, i. 86
  Toup, Jonathan, ii. 284. An eminent scholar, his father lecturer of
    St. Ives, his education, &c. and principal works 265. Death and
    monument 266.――Rev. Jonathan, iii. 123 _bis_. Monument to 123
  Towan, i. 234――iii. 340, 345
  Towednack parish, ii. 260, 271, 358――iii. 5 _bis_, 7, 13, 46――iv. 164
  TOWEDNACK parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, iv. 52.
    Value of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax,
    Castle-an-Dunes, Trecragan 53. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries,
    name, daughter to Lelant, ib. By Editor, saint, soil ibid. Produces
    much tin, also some whetstone, Editor’s manor, court rolls complete,
    foundation of the walls of Amellibrea, Cornish tenures 54. Copyholds
    extinct, record of a manor court, the homage, oath, charge 55.
    Matters to be presented 56. A petition from the widow of Colonel
    Humphrey Noye to Charles 2nd, for the title of Sandys of the Vine
    57. Unsuccessful, impropriation, feast, statistics 58. Geology by Dr
    Boase 59
  Tower, i. 29
  ―――― of London, i. 134――iii. 154, 298, 350――iv. 83.――Sir John Eliot
    committed to, ii. 66. Perkin Warbeck ditto 190, 191.――Sir Richard
    Vyvyan conveyed to, iii. 136, 217. His daughter born there 136. The
    Bishops committed to 296. Mr. Buller sent to 464
  Towington, iii. 195
  Townsend, Francis, Windsor Herald, ii. 375
  “Tractatus de Corde,” &c. iv. 98
  Tracy family, iii. 286
  Tracye, Thomas de, ii. 119
  Tradescantia crassula, iv. 183
  Tragedies of Seneca, notes on, iv. 87
  Trajan, Emperor, i. 206
  Transubstantiation, Cornish doctrine against, i. 109. Berengarius
    against, Romish doctrine triumphant 110
  Travelling a century ago, anecdote of, iv. 91
  Travers, Mr. i. 324
  Tre Yeo, ii. 416
  Treago, account of, i. 248
  ―――― of Treago, i. 248. Arms 249
  Trearick, Prebend of, i. 383
  Trearike, Lord of, i. 382
  Trease of Blissland, etymology, i. 61
  Treassow, account of, iii. 47. A perturbed spirit banished from 48
  Treasurer of England, Lord High, William Scrope, Earl of Wiltshire,
    iii. 129
  Trebant water, iv. 29
  Trebarfoot, iii. 352
  ―――― of Trebarfoot, family, iii. 352
  Trebartha, account of by Editor, ii. 228. Monuments to its
    possessors 229
  Trebatha, account of, ii. 226
  Trebeigh manor in St. Ives, iv. 50
  Trebell village, ii. 385
  Trebennen borough, i. 323 _ter._
  Treberrick in St. Michael Carhays, account of, iii. 202
  Trebersey family, iii. 337
  Trebigh, i. 410. Account of 411
  Trebilliock, two brothers, ii. 255
  Trebizond, empire of, ii. 368
  Treblithike, iii. 65
  Treburget, iv. 47
  Trebursus, ii. 428
  Treby of Trebigh, Hon. George, Lord Chief Justice, and arms, i. 412
  Trecan, iii. 448.――Account of, ii. 397
  Trecarrell, iii. 438
  ―――― family and arms, iii. 40, 41
  ―――― of Trecarrell, Sir H. iii. 44. Built Launceston church 42; and
    re-built Linkinhorne church 45
  ―――― manor, iii. 40, 41. Account of, and monuments to its possessors 43
  Trecragen castle, iv. 53
  ―――― hall, iv. 53
  Trecroben, iii. 7
  ―――― hill, iii. 7. Account of 11
  Trecroogo village, iii. 337
  Tredawl, i. 25
  Tredeathy, account of, iii. 66
  Tredenham, Sir Joseph, i. 44.――Family, i. 305, 414――iii. 381
  ―――― of Lambesso, i. 207
  ―――― of Tredenham, i. 417.――In Probus, family and Sir Joseph, ii.
    217.――Sir Joseph, family, iii. 361; and their property 362. Arms 361
    _bis_
  ―――― of Tregonan, i. 418. John 416, 418. Sir John and Mary 418. Sir
    Joseph, _ter._ and Sir William 416
  ―――― manor, iii. 361
  Tredevy, by Leland, iv. 258
  Tredidon barton, iii. 459
  ―――― of Tredidon, family, iii. 459
  Tredine castle, by Leland, iv. 265
  Tredinham family, ii. 276 _bis_, 281. Sir Joseph 170. Governor of
    St. Mawe’s castle 277. Patron of St. Just 278
  Tredinick, i. 116, 117. Etymology 117
  ―――― Christopher and his arms, i. 116
  ―――― of St. Breock, arms, iv. 95
  Tredrea, the Editor’s place in Cornwall, iii. 307――iv. 143.――Account
    of, i. 360
  ―――― of Tredrea, i. 360, 365
  Tredreath town, iii. 6, 8
  Tree, singular one at Tencreek, iii. 169
  Treegoodwill, ii. 405
  Treen manor, iv. 166
  Trees, subterranean, ii. 207
  Trefelens of Trefelens, William, iii. 326
  Trefey family, iii. 44
  Treffrey in Lanhidrock, account of, ii. 380
  ―――― in Linkinhorne, ii. 380
  ―――― of Fowey, family, ii. 380
  Treffreye, i. 383.――John, defended Fowey against the French, ii. 40.
    His seat at Plase and history 43. John, Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir
    John, William and arms, these cut in Fowey church ibid.
  Treffry family, ii. 36. Thomas fortified his house 46. Mr. Sheriff
    of Cornwall 186. Mr. 279.――Elizabeth, iii. 71. John 72.
    Miss 67.――Miss, iv. 24
  Trefilis, iii. 402
  Trefreke, account of, i. 383
  Trefrew village, ii. 405
  Trefrize manor, iii. 44
  Trefronick, i. 20
  Trefry, John, iii. 347
  Trefusis, i. 125, 225, 226. James 240. Otho de 348――ii. 32. John,
    his lines on Captain Rouse 278. Rev. John 231. R. G. W. Lord Clinton
    313 _bis_, 314 _bis_.――Catherine, iii. 41. Francis 228. Mary 41.
    Nicholas 40 _bis_, 41. Otho 318. Robert 224. Miss 60. Mr. 230. Lord
    Clinton ibid. Family 40, 107, 117, 230, 254, 390. Arms 318.――Family,
    iv. 62
  ―――― of Landew, family, ii. 399
  ―――― of Trefusis, i. 65, 240. George William 151.――Richard, ii.
    304.――Bridget, Francis, iii. 62. Robert 327, 282. Samuel 227. Mr.
    382. Family and arms 227
  ―――― manor, iii. 382. Account of 226. House 227. Situation 231
  Trefyns, account of, ii. 130, 131
  Tregaga or Tresaga family, iii. 209
  ―――― house in Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 209
  Tregagle, Mr. ii. 332 _bis_, 335
  ―――― of Trevorder in St. Breock, tale of one, family, and arms, iii. 265
  Tregago or Trejago, account of, iii. 403
  ―――― castle, &c. house, iii. 403
  ―――― or Trejago, i. 117.――Jane, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211.
    Family 208 _bis_, 214
  ―――― of Tregago, family, built the castle, iii. 403
  Tregallen village, iii. 337
  Tregalravean, account of, ii. 56
  Tregameer, i. 140
  Tregamynyon, account of, iii. 242
  Treganetha, iv. 140
  Tregantle, iii. 438
  Treganyan of Treganyan, family, iii. 215
  ―――― tenement, iii. 209, 215. Etymology 212
  Tregaraan, ii. 51
  Tregaradue, ii. 50
  Tregarden, ii. 109
  Tregare, ii. 50, 275
  Tregarick of Tregarick, Matilda, Mr. and family, iii. 397
  ―――― manor, account of by Hals, iii. 396. By Whitaker 397
  Tregarne manor, ii. 320
  Tregarrick, iv. 29
  Tregarthen family, ii. 114
  Tregarthin of Court, in Brand, family, iii. 198
  Tregarthyn family, ancient and powerful, Catherine, ii. 109. Jane,
    Joan, and her epitaph 110. John 109 _bis_, 110. Margaret 109, 110.
    Mary ibid. Thomas 109 _bis_, 110. Arms 110
  Tregaseal, i. 141
  Tregavethan manor in Kenwin, iii. 192
  Tregavethick village, ii. 399
  Tregavethnan manor, account of by Hals and by Tonkin, ii. 316
  Tregavithick manor, account of, ii. 400
  Tregaza, account of, i. 394
  Tregea, of St. Agnes, John, iii. 315. William 326. Capt. William 315
  ―――― of Lambrigan, William, ii. 353
  Tregeagle, i. 18, 19. John 19.――John, ii. 338
  ―――― of Trevorden, John, iii. 76
  Tregean, Francis, ii. 354
  Tregear manor, iii. 2 _bis_
  Tregeare, account of, i. 263, 264
  ―――― of Tregeare, i. 263, 264. Richard 263. Arms 263, 264. Etymology 264
  ―――― manor, ii. 56, 336. Account of 51, 377. Geran’s parish, part of
    it 54. Purchased by Kempe 57
  Tregedick family, ii. 316
  Tregelly manor, iii. 170
  Tregembo, ii. 217, 218
  Tregena, Mr. ii. 255
  Tregenhawke, account of, ii. 252
  Tregenna, near St. Ives, ii. 215.――Mr. Stephens’s house at, i. 403
    _bis_――ii. 270. Beautiful prospect from a hill near 272.――Rev. John
    of Roach and Mawgan in Pider, iii. 139, 396 _bis_, 399. Miss, Mr.
    and family 406.――Rev. Mr. of Whitstone, iv. 152
  ―――― village, ii. 357
  Tregenno, account of, i. 421
  Tregenyn, i. 408
  Tregethes, i. 364
  Tregew, account of its possessors, ii. 30
  Tregheney Brygge, iv. 255
  Tregheny castle, iv. 228
  Tregian, account of, i. 420
  ―――― family, i. 234, 248.――Francis, ii. 353――iii. 243, 269, 355. His
    history 357 to 360. List of his lost estates 358. Francis the son
    383. His history 360. Persecution 368. Adventure 369. Jane 358. Mr.
    357 _ter._ The unfortunate 549 Mr. 405. Their posterity existing
    in Spain 361. Arms 357.――Francis, iv. 118. Margaret 72
  Tregian of Golden, i. 420
  ―――― of Walvedon, Miss, iii. 102, 103
  Tregillas, John, i. 10
  Tregion, Francis, ii. 305
  ―――― or Tregyn in St. Ewe, iii. 358
  Treglaston, iii. 350
  Tregleah, account of, i. 372
  Treglisson family, iii. 343
  Treglith, iv. 62
  Tregof, ii. 427
  Tregoll village, iii. 353
  Tregonan, i. 418. Account of 416
  Tregone tenement, iii. 223
  Tregonell, account of, i. 247
  ―――― of Middleton, John, i. 247, 248. Sir John 248
  ―――― of Tregonell, i. 247. Arms ibid.
  Tregoney or Tregony parish, iv. 115, 166
  Tregonissy, i. 49
  Tregonnan, in St. Ewe, iii. 361
  Tregonnebris, occupiers of, iii. 427
  Tregonnen village, iii. 334
  Tregonning hill, i. 128 _bis_
  Tregony borough, account of, i. 295. Arms 296.――Members for, Charles
    Trevanion, iii. 200. William Trevanion 205
  ―――― branch of Fale river, iii. 405
  ―――― bridge, i. 245, 299――iii. 207
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 299――ii. 2
  ―――― church, i. 74
  ―――― manor, i. 296
  ―――― parish, i. 242
  ―――― priory, i. 299, 300
  ―――― town, ii. 17, 180――iii. 404, 451. German school at 67
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 272, 289
  ―――― Medan, i. 294 _bis_, 297
  ―――― Pomeroy, i. 297 _bis_
  Tregoos chapel, i. 218
  Tregordock manor, iv. 44
  Tregorick, i. 49
  Tregors, Andrew de, iii. 372
  Tregose, ii. 320.――Miss, iii. 421――iv. 24
  Tregoss moor, i. 230.――Moors, iv. 26
  Tregothick, i. 125
  Tregothnan, i. 140――ii. 33, 308 _bis_――iv. 167
  ―――― of Tregothnan, Johanna. John, and family, iii. 212
  Tregothnan manor, iii. 208, 209, 464. And tenement 209, 215. Gates
    and houses of 209. New house at 212. Account of ibid. Description
    221. Carried to the Boscawens 213
  Tregou village, ii. 399
  Tregoweth of Crantock, Margaret, iii. 177
  Tregoze, i. 39――ii. 130――Arms, i. 39
  Tregtheney-Pomerey castle, iv. 228
  Tregullan village, ii. 385
  Tregumbo, account of, ii. 170
  Tregurtha, ii. 218. Abounds in mines 219
  Tregury, now Tregotha, iv. 143 _bis_
  ―――― Michael de, Archbishop of Dublin, iv. 138, 141, 143, 145.
    Governor of Caen University 138, 144, 145 _bis_. His life 144.
    Ware’s mention of him 145. Buried at St. Patrick’s, Dublin 138. Tomb
    141. Epitaph 138. Death 146. Will 147. Works 148. Family, last heir
    male and three coheirs 143
  Tregwerys, or Trewerys in Probus, iii. 360
  Tregyon family, iii. 404
  Trehane barton, iii. 354, 355, 366, 367, _bis_.――Account of, i. 397
  ―――― of Trehane family, iii. 354. Arms 355
  Trehanick in St. Teath, iii. 212
  Trehavarike, account of, ii. 335
  ―――― of Trehavarike family, ii. 335
  Trehawke family, ii. 399.――Mr. a miser, iii. 19. Family and
    monuments to 20
  ―――― of Leskeard, Mrs. iv. 97
  ―――― of Trehawke, arms, iii. 169
  ―――― iii. 168, or Trehavock, account of 169
  Trehunest village, iii. 372
  Trehunsey manor, iii. 372
  Treiagu, John de, iv. 96
  Treice, Mr. ii. 87
  Treise, Sir Christopher, i. 321.――Family and heir, iv. 60
  Treiwall, ii. 208
  Trejago castle, ii. 2
  ―――― creek, ii. 2
  ―――― Jene, John de, and Stephen, iii. 211. Family 214
  Trekininge, account of, i. 219, 223
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 225
  Trekynin, Jenkyn, iii. 318
  Trelagoe village and manor, i. 3
  Treland Vean, account of, ii. 320
  ―――― Vear, account of, ii. 320
  Trelask manor, iii. 37, 38 _bis_
  Trelauder of Hengar, family and heir, iv. 94
  Trelaun by Leland, iv. 280
  Trelawder of Hengar, or St. Mabyn family, gentlemen of blood and
    arms, their marriages and heir, arms the same as Tredinick’s, iv. 95
  Trelawn, iii. 293. History of by Bond, and house built at 295.
    Masses performed at 301
  ―――― mill, iv. 29
  ―――― wood, iv. 29
  Trelawney in Pelynt, the Hearles settled at, ii. 99
  ―――― family, i. 23. Jane 221. John 65. Sir John 221. W. S., 158.
    Arms 23.――Family, ii. 255, 309. Anna 235. Charles 77 _bis_. Edward
    ibid. Rev. Heal 394. Sir John, Sir Beville Grenville’s letter to
    349. Sir Jonathan 55, 235
  ―――― of Coldrynike, Jonathan and Major John, ii. 67
  ―――― of Lamellin, Sir John, ii. 411
  ―――― of Poble, Kent, ii. 7
  ―――― of Poole, ii. 67. John 411, 412. Sir Jonathan 16――iii. 133. Sir
    Jonathan 168. Family now of Trelawen 170. Arms 169
  ―――― of Trelawne, ii. 67
  Trelawny barton in Altarnun, account of, i. 22.――The cradle of the
    family, iii. 294
  ―――― ii. 151, 397. Rev. E., 229. Edward, Dean of Exeter 238 _bis_.
    Hele and Mr. 230.――Edward, governor of Jamaica, iii. 295 _bis_, 300.
    Rebuilt his house 295. Notice of 299. Monument to and epitaph upon
    292. Sir Harry the Roman Catholic Bishop, memoir of 300. Henry 297.
    Sir John, memoir of, couplet upon, rebuilt his house 295. Sir
    Jonathan, Bishop of Bristol, Exeter, and Winchester 248, 295 _bis_,
    296. Memoir of, one of the seven Bishops sent to the tower 296.
    Letitia 297. Rebecca 248, 249, 297. Sir William 219. Governor of
    Jamaica 300. Sir W. L. S., 301. Family 293. Name 294. Arms 295.
    Monument 292. Saying relating to the family 295.――Major-General
    Charles, governor of Plymouth, iv. 94. Sir Jonathan 34, 139. Sir
    William 37. Rev. Mr. of St. Tudy 93. Arms 96
  Trelawny of Coldrinick, John, iv. 94
  ―――― of the Lawn, Jane, and Sir John, i. 225
  ―――― of Menhynyet, iii. 168
  ―――― of Trelawny, i. 65
  Treleage manor, etymology of, ii. 319
  Trelean, account of, i. 420
  Treleare, the Editor’s farm, ii. 308
  Trelegar, ii. 54, 57. Account, of 55
  Treleigh in Redruth, iii. 359. Manor 383, 384. Account of 383
  Trelevan, iii. 125, 191. Manor 192 _bis_, 194. Occupiers of 192
  Trelevant, of St. Agnes, Hector, iii. 243
  Trelewick, account of, i. 420
  Treligan, i. 27.――Account of, ii. 54
  Trelil, ii. 139
  Trelisick, i. 418. Account of 350, 359, 417. House 359.――Account of
    and house built at, ii. 32.――Or Trelizike in St. Earth, iii. 318, 423
  Trelisike, account of, i. 348.――Or Trelizik, iii. 125
  Trelogas, account of, ii. 300
  Trelowarren, account of, iii. 133, 137
  Treloweth, i. 365. Smelting house at ibid.
  Trelowith manor, iii. 355
  Trelowthes manor, iii. 355
  Treloye chapel, i. 231
  Treluddera, Treluddero, or Treludra, iii. 267, 268, 272――iv.
    141――Rights of, ii. 271
  Treluddro in Newlyn, iii. 319
  Treludra Pippen, iii. 268――iv. 141
  Trelugan manor, ii. 363
  Treluick, account of, i. 417
  Trelven, i. 174
  Trelynike, account of, i. 379
  Tremabe, description of, i. 177
  Tremada, account of, i. 319
  Tremagenna, ii. 405
  Tremain, by Leland, iv. 270
  Tremaine church, iv. 60
  ―――― Rev. H. H. ii. 99.――William, his garden, iii. 343
  ―――― parish, iv. 61, 64, 124, 125, 127
  TREMAINE, or Tremean parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name,
    endowment, impropriation, land tax, chapel of ease to Egloskerry,
    iv. 59. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries 59. Name, daughter to
    Egloskerry 60. By Editor, manor of Tremaine, church, its name,
    patron, impropriation, saint, his feast, statistics 60. Geology by
    Dr. Boase 61
  Tremanheer of Penzance, i. 162
  Tremarastall, ii. 169, 170
  Trematon, i. 199, 203――ii. 70.――iv. 81. By Leland 291
  ―――― castle, i. 296, 297――ii. 42
  ―――― manor, i. 296, 297――iii. 462 _bis_. History of 462
  Tremayne in Mabe, account of, iii. 60
  ―――― in St. Colomb, Major, iii. 61
  ―――― in St. Martyn’s, iii. 61, 63. Account of 124, 126
  ―――― Rev. Charles, i. 398. Rev. H. H., 423, 424. His character 423.
    John 422. John, H., 423, 424. His character 423. Lewis 420, 423. Mr.
    417. Serjeant 424.――Mr. ii. 134.――Arthur, Degory, Edmund, Edmund,
    iii. 61. John, John, John 60. J. H., 230. Rev. Nicholas, Peres de,
    Peros, Richard 60. Richard Roger 61. Thomas, Thomas, Thomas 60. Rev.
    Dr. of Menheniet 171. Miss 102. Mr. 192, 194. Family 60, 197.
    Estates increased 60
  ―――― of Collacomb, i. 416
  ―――― of Croan, H. H. and J. H. i., 377
  ―――― of St. Ewe, Sampson, senior, i. 419.――Or of Heligan or
    Halligan, in St. Ewe, J. H., iii. 240. Lewis 191, 196. Mr. 193
    _bis_. Family 61, 63, 126, 240.――Of Halliggon, Sir John, Col. Lewis,
    Rev. W. and Mr. i. 416. Of Heligan, Rev. H. H., 260, 359. John 260,
    419 _bis_. Sir John and Col. Lewis 419
  ―――― of St. Ive, i. 45
  ―――― of Sydenham, i. 201――iii. 126
  ―――― of Tremayne family, and Miss, iii. 126
  ―――― manor, iv. 60
  ―――― parish in East hundred, iii. 61
  ―――― vicarage, i. 378
  Trembath in Madern, iii. 33, 56
  Trembetha, account of, iii. 7
  Trembleth, account of, i. 405 _bis_
  ―――― chapel, i. 405
  ―――― heir of, iii. 140
  ―――― of Trembleth, arms, iii. 405. Burying place ibid.
  Tremblethick, i. 405
  Trembraze in Leskeard, iii. 209
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of St. Michael Penkivell, iii. 209
  Tremeal, iii. 337 _bis_. House rebuilt 338
  Tremearne, Rev. John, iii. 287
  Tremeen, iv. 97
  Tremenheere, Captain H. P. character of, iii. 88. John, endowed a
    chapel at Penzance 93. Mr. 82. Family 94. Have adorned the new
    church at Penzance 93
  Tremere, account of, ii. 384
  ―――― of Tremere family, ii. 384. Alice, John, and arms 385
  Tremertoun, by Leland, iv. 281
  Tremiloret, iii. 59
  Tremle, William, iii. 115
  Tremoderet en Hell, iii. 393
  Tremogh family, iii. 62
  ―――― etymology, iii. 62. Road near 63
  Tremolesworth, i. 370
  Tremolla in Northill Linkinborne and Liskeard, iii. 359
  Tremoore village, ii. 385
  Tremough, account of, iii. 60, 62
  Tremper bridge, i. 235
  Tremporth river, i. 249. Account of its haven and bridge ibid.
  Tremyton castle, iv. 229
  Trenake, iv. 23
  Trenalt, i. 159
  Trenance, i. 41 _bis_, or Trenants, iv. 160. Account of 161 _bis_
  ―――― Lyttleton, ii. 383.――Littleton, iv. 161.――Family, ii.
    383――iv. 161
  ―――― of Black Haye, John and three daughters, and arms, iv. 161
  Trenant, i. 320. Account of 321. Sold 320
  Trenaran, account of, i. 44
  Trenarran, i. 49
  Trenawick, i. 54
  Trenchard of Collacomb, Isabel, iii. 60
  Trenchicot, ii. 427
  Trencreek, i. 207. Account of 256
  ―――― Miss, iii. 75
  ―――― of Trencreek, Robert, i. 293. Arms 256
  Trenear, possessors, iii. 88
  Trenegles, i. 197
  Treneglos church, iv. 62
  ―――― parish, iv. 59, 64 _bis_, 124, 125 _bis_, 127
  TRENEGLOS parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, name, value of
    benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Warbstow consolidated with
    it, iv. 61. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, etymology, ib.
    Impropriation, value of benefice, incumbent 62. By Editor, Tonkin’s
    etymology right, manor of Downeckney by Lysons, impropriation,
    patronage, statistics ibid. Incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 63
  Trenere, cellar at, ii. 138
  Trenethick, ii. 139
  Trenewan village, ii. 399
  Trenewith, by Leland, iv. 264
  Trengone, took the name of Nance, ii. 337
  Trengove, account of, iv. 128
  ―――― family, iii. 382――iv. 128, 129. Or nanc, John 129, 130. Arms 129
  ―――― of Trengove in Warlegan, family, ii. 238
  Trengreen, i. 54
  Trengwainton, iii. 289. Possessors 85
  Trenhayle, account of, i. 347
  ―――― George and Loveday, i. 357
  ―――― of Trenhayle, i. 347
  Trenheale, Rev. Reginald of Newlin, iii. 267
  Trenhorne village, iii. 38
  Trenithick or Trenithicke, account of, ii. 136, 137
  Trenorren, etymology by Tonkin, i. 47
  Trenouth, i. 221
  ―――― family, iii. 208
  ―――― of Fentongollan, Johanna and Ralph, iii. 397
  Trenoweth, i. 213
  ―――― of Bodrigan, Sir Henry, iii. 102
  ―――― of St. Colomb, Major, Miss, iii. 147. Family buried in St.
    Colomb church ibid.
  ―――― of Trenoweth, Catherine, iii. 211. John, John 211, 214.
    Margaret 211 _bis_. Maud 211. Philippa 211, 214. Family 213, 214
  ―――― lands, iii. 147
  Trenowith, i. 117.――Arms, the family changed their name to Bodrigan,
    ii. 107.――Family, iv. 71
  ―――― manor, i. 406. _See Trewithgy_
  Trenowth, arms, iv. 72
  Trenwith, account of, ii. 259, 261
  ―――― of Trenwith, i. 125――ii. 259, 260. Thomas and arms 259
  ―――― manor, iv. 52, 164
  Treonike, i. 18
  Trequanors, ii. 203, 211
  Treranell, account of, i. 405
  Treravall, i. 406
  Trereardrene, i. 12
  Trereen, Dinas, iii. 30, 34.――Described, iv. 165 _bis_.――Walk to
    church from, iii. 32
  Trereife, iii. 85
  Trerice manor, i. 20, 395――iii. 270. Sir John Arundell removed to
    274.――Cause of his removal, ii. 184
  Treridern, i. 321
  Treroach, Trecarrek or Tregarreck, iii. 391. Possessors 393
  Treruff manor, iii. 382
  Trerule fool, ii. 79
  Tresaddarne, i. 219
  Tresahar, i. 161.――Mr. ii. 11
  Tresassen, iv. 29
  Tresaster, i. 221
  Tresavren barton, iv. 4
  Tresawsen or Tresawsan, iii. 322. Account of 182
  Trescaw in Breage, ii. 217
  Trescobays, i. 136.――In Budock, iii. 248
  Trescow island, iv. 171, 172, 174. Extent of 175
  Tresilian, i. 10, 148――iii. 274
  ―――― or Tresillian bridge, i. 387――ii. 2, 17――iii. 207――iv. 76
  ―――― Sir Robert, Chief Justice, ii. 294.――Killed, iv. 16
  ―――― of Bodilly, Thomas, ii. 137
  ―――― of Roughtra, family, ii. 137
  ―――― of Tresilian, Robert, Lord Chief Justice, iii. 269
  ―――― or Tresulian, iii. 270. Manor 269
  ―――― river, iii. 180, 423
  Tresimple, account of, i. 205
  Tresinny, i. 3
  Tresithany chapel, i. 218
  Tresithney, Thomas, iii. 181. Heir of 140
  Treskeaw, i. 119
  Treskewis, Dame, iii. 60
  Tresmarrow, possessors of, iii. 337
  Tresmere parish, iv. 59, 60, 61 _bis_
  TRESMERE parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries, value
    of benefice, endowment, impropriation, land tax, iv. 63. By
    Tonkin, situation, ib. Boundaries, etymology, value of benefice,
    impropriation, curate’s stipend withheld 64. By Editor, belonged
    to Launceston priory, churches served by monks, allusion to the
    “Last Minstrel” ibid. Councils ordained that each parish should
    have a resident priest, provision for them, distinction between
    vicar and perpetual curate, remark on Tonkin’s statement,
    impropriator, patron, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 65
  Tresmore manor, iv. 129
  Tresmorrow, ii. 418
  Tresona, i. 160
  Tresongar, account of, i. 383
  Tresore, iii. 77
  Tresparret Downs, ii. 88, 275
  Trespearn village, ii. 377
  Tress, ii. 151
  Tressmare, ii. 430
  Tresuggan, account of, i. 225
  Tresuran, i. 213
  Treswithan, i. 162, 163
  Trethac, i. 174
  Trethake, Matthew de, iii. 134
  Trethay, iii. 402
  Tretheage barton, iv. 2, 3. Described 4
  ―――― manor, iv. 2. Description and history of 3
  Trethergye, i. 49
  Tretheris, ruins of an ancient chapel at, i. 18
  Tretheves manor, account of, ii. 358
  Trethevye, Cromlech at, i. 193. Description of 194
  Trethewoll, account of, i. 408
  Trethewy village, iii. 337
  Trethil, iii. 440
  Trethinick, Ralph de, i. 246
  Trethurfe manor, account of, ii. 353, 354
  ―――― of Trethurfe family, and John, ii. 353. Reginald 354. Arms 353
  Trethym, i. 2, 25
  Trethyn castle, iv. 228
  Trethyrfe, Jane and Thomas, ii. 100
  ―――― of Trethyrfe, John, i. 65
  Treu-es-coit manor, iii. 64
  Treuren, by Leland, iv. 289
  Treuris, ii. 427 _bis_
  Trevadlack village, iii. 38
  Trevailer, account of, ii. 124
  Trevalaboth, ii. 203, 211
  Trevales, iv. 4
  Trevalga, i. 322――ii. 28, 235
  ―――― or Trevalgar parish, iii. 22, 232
  TREVALGA parish, by Hals, a rectory, situation, boundaries,
    antiquity, value of benefice, a rectory, patrons, iv. 66. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, a rectory, and its value ibid. Manor of
    Trevalga 67. By Editor, description of the parish church, near the
    cliff, named from the manor, patrons, rector, statistics ibid.
    Geology by Dr. Boase 68
  Trevallock, i. 140
  Trevance, account of, ii. 255
  Trevanion, possessors of, iii. 199. House described 201, 202
  ―――― i. 43, 113. Joan and Sir William 65.――John, M.P. for Cornwall,
    and rhyme on his election, ii. 351. Richard 110 _ter._ Mr. 118. Sir
    H. Bodrigan’s defence against him, shares Bodrigan’s property 115.
    Newnham manor given to him 318. Mr. 414. Sir Nicholas 56. Of St.
    German’s 162. Mr. 230. Nicholas, Richard, and Richard, iv. 116
  ―――― of Carhayes, i. 298.――John, ii. 304.――Charles, iv. 156. Mr.
    45.――Or Trevenion, John, iii. 141, 226. William ibid. Family 355
  ―――― of Crego, Charles, i. 297. Attempts to make the Val navigable 298
  ―――― of Crogith, i. 299
  ―――― of Tregarthyn, i. 397.――Charles, ii. 414
  ―――― of Trelegon, Anne and Hugh, i. 302.――Or Treligan, Hugh, iii. 191
  ―――― of Trevanion and Carhayes, Amey, Charles, iii. 199. Charles 200
    _bis_, 202. Sir Charles 199, 200, 201. Hugh, Hugh, Hugh 199. Sir
    Hugh, his sword 206. John 141. John 199. John 200. John and John
    improved Trevanion 201. John, a letter from 204. Colonel John 200,
    201. Colonel John, his death 204. J. T. P. B., 205 _bis_. Richard
    201. William 199, 201, 205 _bis_. Sir William, Sir William 199. Mr.
    and Rev. Mr. 200. Family 199, 203. Sided with Henry 7th 204. Arms
    200. Monuments 206
  ―――― of Trevorter, ii. 304. Alice ibid. John 304 _bis_. John and
    Mary ibid.
  ―――― of Trevoster, Alice and John, iii. 213
  Trevannance barton, i. 8. Etymology 8 and 9. Possessors 9. House
    taken down 10
  ―――― harbour, i. 11
  Trevannion family, ii. 395
  ―――― of Caryhaes, i. 43.――Of Caryhays, ii. 54, 55, 110. Charles 111
    _ter._
  ―――― of Trelegar, ii. 54, 57
  ―――― of Treligan, ii. 54. Hugh 51, 54, 55 _ter._ His lawsuit 51
  Trevanthions family, ii. 128
  Trevarnoe, occupiers of, iii. 446
  Trevartea, Onesa, iii. 60
  Trevarthen, account of, ii. 218
  Trevarthian, Miss and Mr. iii. 423
  Trevascus, account of, i. 114
  Trevasens, account of, i. 113
  Trevassack, iii. 342
  Treveale family, iii. 442
  Treveally, John, i. 119
  Trevear, account of, iii. 429
  Treveares, iv. 45
  Trevedarne in Buryan, iii. 134
  Treveeg, account of, ii. 86
  Trevega, iv. 157
  Treveleck, account of, i. 254
  Trevelga parish, iv. 42
  Trevelisick Wartha, i. 417
  ―――― Wollas, i. 417
  Trevella, William de, iii. 442 _bis_
  Trevellance or Trefelens, ii. 326, 327. Account of 326
  Trevellans, alias Nicholas, alias Williams, John and Nicholas, iii. 318
  Trevelles, i. 8――iii. 326. In St. Agnes 327
  Trevellick, account of, i. 257
  Trevellva, account of, iii. 237
  Trevelver, iii. 240
  Trevelyan, iv. 114
  ―――― family, iii. 117, 126, 215, 309 _bis_. Wonderful tale of their
    ancestor 309, 310. Heiress 215.――Lord Chief Justice, iv. 114, and
    family 114 _ter._
  ―――― of Nettlecombe, Somersetshire, Sir John, iii. 307, 311. Family
    307, 238
  Trevemper bridge, iii. 275
  Trevena barton, iv. 20
  Treveneage 170, 217 _bis_. Account of 170. Abounds in mines 219
  Trevener, Rev. John, i. 260
  Treveniel, ii. 229
  Trevenin tenement, iii. 223
  Trevenion barton, ii. 114
  Trevenna, i. 340
  Trevennen, account of, ii. 113
  Trevenner, Mr. ii. 414
  Trevenny parish, iv. 120
  Trevenor family, ii. 357
  Trevenson, ii. 241 _bis_
  Treveor, account of by Tonkin, ii. 113. By the Editor 114
  Treveor of Treveor, Sir Henry, ii. 113
  Treverbyn manor, i. 42. Etymology ibid.
  ―――― of Treverbyn, i. 41, 42. Hugh and Katherine 43. Walter 43, 44.
    Sir Walter 44
  ―――― burying place, i. 42
  Treveres, account of, ii. 279
  Trevernon, iii. 239
  Trevery, ii. 126――iii. 127
  Treveryan, iv. 109
  Trevethen of Porthcothen, iii. 177
  Trevethey stone, i. 194. Etymology 195
  Trevethow, iii. 9. Account of 11
  Trevia, ii. 405
  Treviderow manor, iii. 250
  Trevidror, i. 148
  Trevilan farm, chapel at, iii. 335
  Treviles or Trefilies, iv. 117
  Trevilian bridge, iii. 189
  ―――― Mr. of Devon, ii. 251. Chief Justice 153――iv. 36.――Family, iii. 216
  ―――― manor, iv. 124
  ―――― river, i. 202
  Trevilion, Mr. ii. 261, 269
  Trevill of Plymouth, i. 348
  Treville family, ii. 252, 397. Richard 252. William de 156
  Trevillian, i. 36――iii. 125. Sir John 306. Mr. 116, 124, 128. Mrs. 421
  ―――― of Basill, i. 198, 199, 200. Sir John, anecdote of 200. Peter
    198, 199. Arms 198
  ―――― of Nettlecomb, John, i. 198 _bis_, 200
  ―――― of Somersetshire family, iv. 39
  Trevillis village, iii. 348
  Trevilload, i. 348
  Trevillon, account of, i. 400
  Trevingy, Reginald, iii. 387
  Trevisa, Charles, iii. 163. John translated the Bible and other
    books 163
  ―――― John, his King Arthur, i. 337
  ―――― of Crockaddon, James, i. 313. John, translator of the Bible,
    and arms 314
  ――――’s and Tindall’s translation of the Bible, i. 121
  Trevisick, i. 11, 418
  Trevithick, account of, i. 223, 234, 416
  ―――― Richard improver of steam engine, i. 164
  Trevocar Winoe, iv. 155
  Trevor, Captain Tudor, R.N. ii. 32――iii. 186. Judge 144
  Trevorder, account of, i. 117
  ―――― Bickin, i. 117
  Trevorick, ii. 255
  Trevorike, account of, ii. 255
  Trevorter, account of, ii. 304
  Trevorva, etymology, &c., iii. 355
  ―――― of Trevorva, family and heir, iii. 356
  Trevosa barton, account of, iii. 175
  ―――― head in St. Merryn, iii. 241, 282. Interesting 180. Latitude
    and longitude 281
  ―――― manor, iii. 75, 175. Possessors of 178
  Trevygham, iii. 22
  Trevyrick, iii. 269
  Trewalda, ii. 145
  Trewan, i. 227
  Trewane, account of, ii. 338
  Trewaras head, i. 129
  Trewardevi, i. 236. Account of 237
  Trewardreath, ii. 391
  Trewardreth, by Leland, iv. 289
  Trewardreva, in Constantine, iii. 427
  Trewardruth priory, i. 307
  Trewedeneck, by Leland, iv. 272
  Treweeke barton, iv. 4, 136
  ―――― Rev. George, ii. 250.――Of Illogan and St. Minver, iii. 239,
    241. Rev. Mr. 396. Of Roach 391, 399
  Treween, i. 25
  Treweere, account of, i. 391
  Trewen manor, account of, ii. 397
  TREWEN parish, by Hals, a vicarage, situation, boundaries,
    etymology, impropriation, land tax, fair, Polyvant, iv. 68. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, name, name by Whitaker 69. By Editor,
    belonged to St. German’s priory, an appendix to South Petherwin,
    impropriation, and patronage, statistics ibid. Geology by Dr. Boase 70
  Trewenethick in St. Agnes, Bartholomew, and Joan de, iii. 315
  Trewenn, i. 21. Account of 320
  ―――― parish, i. 377――iii. 335, 457
  Trewenter, ii. 427
  Trewer manor, account of, ii. 397
  Trewergy, i. 318. Account of 321
  Trewerne, Rev. Mr. of Withiel, iv. 161
  Trewhele, account of, i. 391
  Trewheler, i. 387
  Trewhella, Christopher and John, iv. 55
  Trewhelow, James, iv. 55
  Trewhythenick, account of, i. 207
  ―――― copper mill, i. 364 _bis_
  ―――― arms, i. 207
  Trewin, William, ii. 160
  Trewinard, i. 125, 344, 360. Account of 344, 349, 356. Etymology
    350――iii. 112.――House improved by Mr. C. Hawkins, i. 358.――In St.
    Earth, iii. 367
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 267
  ―――― chapel, i. 345
  ―――― i. 118, 136 _bis_, 301. Joseph 137. Arms 136.――Rev. Mr. ii. 80,
    127.――Rev. James of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 124, 126, 128.
    Rev. Mr. of Mawnan 75
  ―――― of Trewinard, i. 344, 350, 351. Deiphobus, killed a man,
    obtained the royal pardon by conveying all his estates to Sir
    Reginald Mohun 345. Was tried and convicted 346. Lived on small
    stipend from Sir Reginald ibid. Tradition of the murder 356. A
    descendant of Trewinard living lately in the Strand ibid. Rev.
    James, and Sir James 350. John M.P. arrested for debt 344, 356.
    Martin 345, 350. William 350. Arms 346
  Trewince, ii. 5, 54. Account of 57, or Trefynns 133
  Trewiney, iii. 194
  Trewinn parish, iv. 50, 51
  Trewinneck, iv. 96
  Trewinnow, i. 257
  Trewinnock, i. 404
  Trewint, i. 25.――In Lesnewith, iii. 132. Account of 170
  Trewish, i. 196
  Trewithan, iii. 356――iv. 139. Account of 367
  Trewithenike, account of, i. 243 _bis_. House improved 245
  Trewithgy, Trenoweth, or Treworgy, in Probus, iii. 355, 358, 365
  Trewithian, ii. 55 _bis_. Account of 54. Its possessors 58
  Trewolla family, built a pier at Mevagissey, iii. 192.――John, ii.
    111 _ter._ Family and arms 110
  ―――― or Trewoolla of Trewoolla, or Trewolla in St. Goran, iii. 191,
    192 _bis_
  Trewollea, ii. 230
  Trewoofe manor, i. 142
  ―――― of Trewoofe, i. 142, and arms 142
  Trewoola account of, ii. 110
  Trewoolla, arms of, i. 206
  Trewoon in Budock, iii. 61
  Trewoone manor, account of, iii. 196, 197
  Treworder, i. 367
  Treworell, ii. 430
  Treworgan, i. 207. Account of 396, 403
  ―――― Vean, account of, i. 396
  Treworgy, ii. 87. _See Trewithgy_
  ―――― parish, ii. 391
  Treworgye, i. 316. Described 177
  Trework, George of Penzance, ii. 218
  Treworock, i. 418. Described 177
  Treworrell village, iii. 22
  Trewortha Vean, occupants of, iii. 188
  Treworthen, John, i. 241
  ―――― of Treworthen, Sir John, Sir Otho, and Walter, family and arms,
    iii. 269
  ―――― manor, iii. 269
  Treworthgy, ii. 429
  Treworthy, account of, iii. 383
  Treworveneth, iii. 288
  Trewother, iii. 355
  Trewothike, account of, i. 39
  Trewred manor, iv. 70
  Trewren, i. 260. Arms 237.――Rev. Richard of Withiel, iv. 162, 163
    _bis_. His wife and two daughters 163
  ―――― of Drift, Mr. and family, iii. 427
  ―――― of Tredreva in Constantine, iv. 163
  ―――― of Trewardreva, i. 237, 241――iv. 3.――Catherine, i. 376. John
    237. Rev. Richard 376
  Trewret barton, iv. 70
  Trigantan, i. 258
  Trigg, Rev. Mr. of Warliggon, iv. 128
  ―――― hundred, i. 129, 153――ii. 151, 332, 394――iii. 64, 237――iv. 42,
    44, 48, 49, 93, 95
  ―――― Major hundred, or Trigmajorshire, i. 60, 377――ii. 86, 232, 273,
    274, 402――iv. 12 _bis_, 15, 50, 101, 131.――Divided into Strathan and
    Lesnewith, iii. 22
  Trigminorshire, i. 367, 382――ii. 49, 274 _bis_, 402 _ter._――iv. 66,
    93.――Why so called, i. 60
  Trigonometrical survey, i. 149――ii. 359――iii. 98, 281, 432――iv. 31
  Trinity in Lanlivery, ii. 393
  ―――― Chantry in St. Colomb Major, i. 214
  ―――― chapel at Restormel, i. 338
  ―――― college, Cambridge, iii. 95, 188
  ―――― college, Dublin, library of, iv. 147
  ―――― college, Oxford, iii. 86, 258
  ―――― house, iii. 378.――Corporation, character of, ii. 359
  Trink, iii. 7
  Trion, St. i. 341
  Tripcony, i. 136.――John, ii. 119 _bis_, 120. Mr. 110, 414. Arms 124
  Trist, Miss, i. 401.――Rev. Jeremiah, iv. 122. Rev. S. P. J., 122,
    123 _ter._
  Triste, i. 164
  Tristram, Sir, ii. 308
  Trivalis castle, King Richard confined at, ii. 178
  Troad, Thomas, iii. 256, 350
  Trojan war, i. 342
  Trout, disquisition on the relative merits of, iii. 442
  Trove, i. 142
  Trowall or Truth well, ii. 219
  Trowbridge, of Trowbridge in Devon, Catherine and John, ii. 339
  Trowell farm, ii. 83――iii. 47
  Trowis, German, i. 192
  Trowse, i. 348
  Troy, iii. 418, 420.――Chronicles, and wars of, abridged, iv. 141
  Troyes, Lupus Bishop of, ii. 64
  Truan, account of, i. 221
  Trubody, ii. 36.――Charles, i. 44
  ―――― of Treworock, i. 177, 178
  Trungle, iii. 288
  Trewrew castle, iv. 228
  Truro, Baron, ii. 380
  ―――― borough, corporation of, ii. 81. M.P. for, Colonel John Lemon
    ibid.――John Lemon, iii. 229――iv. 33.――Kelland Courtenay, ii.
    385.――Henry Vincent, iii. 191
  ―――― bridge, iii. 207
  ―――― church, Mr. Lemon buried at, ii. 85
  ―――― manor, ii. 31
  ―――― and Tregrewe manor, in Themwyn and Truro, iii. 359
  ―――― parish, ii. 298, 301, 302, 315
  TRURO parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, sea flows to the
    walls, two manors at the conquest, iv. 70. Value of benefice,
    incorporation, patron, incumbent, land tax, arms of King John in
    the church windows, also the Prince of Wales’s plume 71. Manor and
    royalty attached to the rectory, erection of the church, no tower
    or steeple, benefice chiefly consists of voluntary subscriptions
    72. Question of its expediency, monument to John Robartes, and to
    three brothers, Dominican chapel, nunnery of Clares called Anhell,
    town a coinage town, charter of Elizabeth 73. Constitution and
    arms of the borough, form of writ, birthplace of Lord Robarts,
    fairs and cheap markets, Custom House, chief inhabitants, wealth,
    and fine buildings, Captain Upcott 74. By Tonkin and Whitaker,
    situation and boundaries, Tonkin’s etymology from Camden, rejected
    by Whitaker, a rectory, value, patron 75. Incumbent, site of the
    town, from Leland, two brooks, the three streets and three
    churches, coinage, the town a borough, the castle, small creek,
    Tonkin’s commentary on this description, and Whitaker’s on his 76.
    View from the castle, no remains of it, incorporation, seal,
    principal burgesses, mayor is also mayor of Falmouth 77. By
    Whitaker, town named from the castle, which belonged to the Earls
    of Cornwall, nothing but the mount or keep remaining, gave origin
    to the town 78. Seated on the westerly current, etymology,
    supposed rise and progress of the town 79. New way to Kenwin
    church, new bridge, anticipated act of parliament for
    improvements, church first dedicated to St. Pancras, now to St.
    Mary 80. Architecture of the church, castle later than the
    conquest, built by one of the Norman Earls, town in possession of
    Richard de Lacy a century after the conquest 81. Privileged as a
    borough, charter lost, but confirmed by Reginald Fitzroy Earl of
    Cornwall 82. The seal, the charter 83. Confirmed by Henry II. the
    mayor still mayor also of Falmouth, town has superiority over
    Falmouth harbour 84. By Editor, Truro allowed to be the first town
    in Cornwall, leads in all county concerns, the school and its
    masters, Dr. Jane, Dean of Gloucester 85. Epigram upon, Truro has
    produced Mr. Polwhele and Sir Hussey Vivian, and in the 16th
    century the learned Farnaby 86. His death, and works, Boyle’s
    character of him 87. Several families have made large fortunes
    there, the Robarteses Earls of Radnor, the Vincents 88. Mr.
    Gregor, Mr. Lemon, Mr. Coster, Mr. Daniel, Mr. Vivian, Mr. Hussey
    89. Mr. Thomas, Samuel Foote, tragedy in his mother’s family of
    which he published a narrative, the two Landers, a monument to one
    90. Mr. Charles Warrick invented and used the paddle wheel for
    boats, modern changes, specimen 91. Statistics, rector, Geology by
    Dr. Boase 92
  Truro river, i. 202――ii. 33
  ―――― new road, iii. A 89.――Road from Redruth, ii. 304
  ―――― school, ii. 355
  ―――― town, i. 58 _bis_, 77, 84, 177――ii. 2, 17, 34, 84, 304, 318,
    354, 379, 381, 388――iii. 16, 18, 38, 189, 196, 324 _bis_, 367――iv.
    30, 167. A coinage town, ii. 301. Ferry to 212. Passage from
    Falmouth to 226. Road to Falmouth from 304.――Road to Helston from,
    iv. 4.――Ships obliged to go up to, ii. 9. The old part is in Kenwyn
    parish 317. Assizes removed to 431. People of 85. Road through to
    Falmouth 104.――A family of, iii. 213
  Truru, by Leland, iv. 272
  Truthan, account of, i. 396, 403
  Truthon, i. 398 _bis_
  Try, ii. 124
  Trywardreth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tubb, Agnes and Charles, ii. 395. Family ibid.――iii. 129 _bis_
  Tubby, i. 276 _bis_, 277 _quat._
  Tuckfield, John, ii. 296
  Tudor, Mary, iii. 369. House of 370.――Race of, ii. 381
  ―――― times, ii. 114――iii. 8
  Tudy, St. i. 129, 131
  ―――― St. manor, iv. 97
  ―――― St. parish, iv. 44
  TUDY, St. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, antiquity,
    value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, history of St. Udith,
    reproved for her fine dress, her answer, iv. 93. Hengar, Penvose,
    Dameliock castle 94. The castle defaced, Billing family 95. By
    Tonkin, situation, boundaries, value of benefice, patron, incumbents
    ibid. Tinten manor, Tynten family 96. By Editor, splendid monuments
    in the church, one to Mr. A. Nicoll, St. Editha, died early at
    Wilton, was very self-denying, Canute’s opinion of her ibid. The
    opening of her tomb convinced him, patrons of the benefice, present
    incumbent, soil, face of the land, the manor, and those of Tinten
    and Kellygreen, Tremeer, Sir William Lower’s works 97. Those of Dr.
    Lower his brother, description of Hengar and the scenery around,
    statistics, and Geology by Dr. Boase 98
  Tue, St. i. 251, 294
  Tunbridge, ii. 295
  ―――― castle, ii. 424
  Tunnel rock, iii. 36
  Turbervill, James, Bishop of Exeter, i. 108, 109
  Turks, i. 130, 411 _bis_――iv. 148.――War with, ii. 371. Subdued
    Constantinople 365. Conspired with Demetrius Paleolagus 366
  Turner, Francis, Bishop of Ely, iii. 299
  Turner’s wear, ii. 1, 17 _bis_
  Turvey, ii. 292
  Tutbury castle, Staffordshire, ii. 89
  Twickenham, Pope’s grotto at, iii. 53
  Twysden, Judge, ii. 5
  Tybesta, i. 253, 256, 258, 297. Described 253
  ―――― chapel, i. 253
  ―――― manor, iii. 195
  Tyburn, ii. 191
  Tye family, iii. 90
  Tyer family, iii. 84
  Tyes, Sir Henry le, Lord T. (or de Tiers), iii. 314
  Tyhiddy, ii. 235 _bis_, 239 _ter._ Account of by Hals 235. By Tonkin
    238, 239. By the Editor 240
  Tyhiddy downs, ii. 235
  Tyncombe, Mr. ii. 43.――Rev. Mr. iv. 110
  Tyndall’s Bible, iii. 163 _bis_
  Tyne river, i. 2.90
  Tyngmouth river, source of, iv. 237
  Tynnyherne, ii. 430
  Tyntagell castle, iv. 228
  Tynten, John de, _ter._ and family, iv. 96
  Typpet of St. Colomb, Matthew, Richard, and arms, iv. 139
  Tywardreath, or Tywardreth monastery, iii. 7――ii. 9
  Tywardreth, or Tywardreath parish, i. 52, 167――ii. 36, 44, 88, 89
    _bis_, 92, 390――iii. 55, 56
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 275
  TYWARDRETH parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, antiquity, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, and land tax, the
    priory alien, iv. 99. History of the saints Sergius and Bacchus,
    founders of the abbey, dedicated to St. Andrew, his history 100.
    Alien priories suppressed, this an exception, its revenues at the
    general dissolution, account of Menabilly 101. Castle Dore 102. By
    Tonkin, situation, late incumbent, value of benefice, manor,
    belonged time of Henry IV. to the Champernowns, given by the
    conqueror to Robert, Earl of Morton, Leland’s description of the
    town, &c., 102. By the Editor, antiquity of the church and its
    tower, interior decorations, alteration of churches, the different
    purposes to which they are now destined, the monastery has
    disappeared 103. Description from the foundations, which could be
    discovered by digging 104. Charter, the convent seal, St. Andrew’s
    relics brought to Abernethy in Scotland, now St. Andrew’s, priory
    suppressed with other alien houses, but re-established,
    correspondence between Thomas Cromwell and the last prior 105.
    Preserved at Wardour, its nature 106. History of the manor,
    Menabilly, Rashleigh family 107. Mr. Rashleigh’s collection of
    minerals, and published account of them, with a geological plate,
    representing a stream-work, destroyed soon after, his grotto and
    death 108. Polkerris, improvements in, Kilmarth, Treveryan,
    statistics, vicar, patron 109. Geology by Dr. Boase, mines of
    Lanescot, and Fowey consols 110
  ―――― priory, ii. 45, 113――iii. 56, 232 _quat._――iv. 62, 64, 127.――The
    manor taken from, ii. 46; or abbey, its founder, dedicated to St.
    Andrew, not suppressed, iv. 101. Communication respecting it in
    the Gentleman’s Magazine, suppressed, but re-established 105.
    Extracts from its calendar 106.――Prior of, i. 41, 42, 52, 414――ii.
    36, 38, 89――iii. 195――iv. 63 _bis_, 64; or abbot 99 _bis_. List of
    the priors 106.――Curious letter to one, ii. 47
  Tywarnhaile manor, i. 12――iii. 316, 327. Account of 313. House 314
  ―――― Tier’s manor, iii. 313 _bis_, 314, 316, 327. Account of 314
  Tywarnhayle, ii. 130
  Tywednick parish, ii. 257 _bis_, 258 _bis_
  Tywidneck, iv. 164
  Tywoodreth river, source of, iv. 237

  Udith, or Udye, St. her history, disputation with Bishop Ethelwold
    about female attire, iv. 93. Her brother Edward the martyr, her
    death, built St. Denis’s church at Wilton, called the younger, her
    aunt was another St. Udith 94
  Udnow Parva, iii. 306
  Udy, i. 61
  ―――― St. iv. 42
  Udye, St. parish, i. 60――iii. 64, 222
  Uffa, Lieutenant of Devonshire, iii. 415
  Ugbere, or Ogbere tenement, iv. 41
  Ulette, St. i. 341
  Ulex nanus, iv. 54
  Ulster, king of arms, iv. 144
  Umphravill, Mr. ii. 146.――Alicia, and John, her husband, iii. 140.
    Family, ib.
  Underhill, Thomas, ii. 192
  Union, Scotch, i. 126
  United Kingdom, various measures in, iii. 433
  ―――― States, iii. 89
  Universal history, ii. 368
  Unwena, Bishop of Dorchester, iv. 137
  Uny, St. iii. 5 _bis_, 7 _ter._, 384 _bis_. Buried at Lelant 7.――Or
    Unan, name explained, iv. 313
  Uny, Lelant parish, iii. 5
  Upcott, George and Jonathan, i. 45.――Joseph of Morval, iv. 187.
    William of Truro, ib. Captain William, memoir of 74
  Upton barton overwhelmed in sand, ii. 149
  ―――― Nicholas, iii. 437――iv. 71.――His MS. of heraldry, i. 170,
    338――ii. 107――iv. 71.――Family, iii. 38 _bis_, 148――iv. 156
  ―――― of Upton and Colombton, iv. 156
  ―――― of St. Winow, heir of, iv. 156
  ―――― de re Militari, iv. 141
  Urban, Mr. iii. 143
  Urchuarth, Miss, i. 244
  Urlick, Mr. and Mr. iii. 88
  Urns, found at Dance-Meyns, i. 141. At Trembleth 405
  Urny, St. iii. 461
  Uro, R. iv. 79
  Ursan of Richardock, i. 330 _bis_, 331, 332
  Ursula, St. story and picture of, i. 195
  Ursula’s, St. tomb, i. 195
  Ushant, ii. 246
  Usher’s, Archbishop, iii. 331, 332.――Brit. Eccles. Antiq. &c. i. 83,
    321.――“De Christ. Eccles.” &c. iii. 257.――His account of St. Kebius,
    ii. 338
  Ustick, i. 144, 371, 376 _bis_. Oliver 145.――Family, iii.
    216.――Stephen, iv. 4
  ―――― of Bideford, Michael, i. 375
  ―――― of Botallock, ii. 285 _bis_
  ―――― of Lea, Oliver, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendavy, Richard, i. 376
  ―――― of Pendevey, Mrs. iv. 163
  ―――― of Penzance, Mr. ii. 34
  Usticke, Rev. Mr. iii. 77. Miss 85
  Uter Pendragon, King, i. 326, 339, 342――iv. 94.――His history, i.
    326. Death 332. Arms 326
  Uthno manor, iii. 307 _bis_
  Uxellodunum, iii. 25 _bis_.――Mentioned by Cæsar, ii. 237
  Uzella, iii. 24 _bis_, 25, 26
  ―――― river, iii. 24

  Vabe, La, or St. parish, _see Mabe_
  Vacye tenement, iv. 41
  Val river, i. 74, 294, 297. Attempts of Mr. Trevanion to make it
    navigable 298
  Valancey bridge, ii. 50
  Vale river, i. 242, 253, 256, 258――ii. 1 _ter._, 17, 24, 298――iii.
    402 _bis_
  ―――― Royal abbey, Cheshire, iii. 232
  Valemouth, ii. 1
  Valerian, Emperor, i. 88
  Valerianus, Emperor, iii. 434
  Valgenow, ii. 1
  Valle, abbey de, i. 300 _bis_
  Valletort, Valitort, or Valletorta, i. 36. Joan, ib. Reginald de 42.
    Roger de Lord of Trematon castle 296.――Jane de, ii. 8. Joan de 109.
    Reginald de 119.――Joan de, iii. 448.――Roger de, iv. 41, 77, 82
  Valmune, ii. 1
  Valor Beneficiorum, ii. 30, 34, 86, 89, 232, 273――iv. 185
  ―――― Ecclesiasticus, ii. 412――iii. 253, 278, 453 _ter._――iv. 4, 5, 69
  Valuba, supposed to be Falmouth, ii. 20
  Valubia, i. 28
  Van Tromp defeated by Blake, and his subsequent victory, ii.
    25.――His death 27
  Vandals, i. 334
  Vandower, taken by the English, ii. 177
  Vane, Sir Henry, i. 314
  Vann family, iv. 121
  Vanstort, ii. 153
  Varfull, account of, iii. 44
  Vasnoom, Rev. Mr. ii. 384
  Vatican at Penzance, iii. 89
  Vaughan, Rev. Thomas, i. 300.――John, iii. 185. Mr. 166
  ―――― of Ottery, John, i. 39. Arms 39
  ―――― of Trewothick and Ottery, i. 371
  Vaultershome, iii. 107
  Vaux of Northamptonshire, family, iii. 404, 405
  Vaye, St. manor, iii. 222
  Vaynfleet, Oller, iv. 55
  Veal, Mr. ii. 150.――Family, iv. 54
  Veale family, and George, ii. 124. Rev. Mr. 124 _bis_. Rev. Mr. the
    first protestant vicar of Gulval 124.――George, iii. 88. Mr. 82.
    Family 94, 286.――Sampson, iv. 55. Rev. W. of Zennar 166
  ―――― of Trevarla, George and Mr. iii. 91
  Vean, John, Robert, iii. 387
  Veep, or Veepe, St. parish, i. 319――ii. 394, 409――iv. 155, 159
  VEEP, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, impropriation,
    founder of church, ancient name, value of benefice, patron,
    incumbent, impropriation, iv. 110. Land tax, Priory of Carock, St.
    Pile, Walter of Exeter lived there, wrote the Life of Guy Earl of
    Warwick, different opinions of the historian, new house, burying
    place converted into a garden, Botowne 111. By Tonkin, situation,
    boundaries, ib. A vicar, value, patron, impropriation, manor of
    Manely 112. By Editor, situation of the church, monuments, St.
    Syriac priory, for two monks only, and St. Currie church ibid.
    Revenue of the priory, St. Cyric’s Creek, the saint buried on the
    site now called St. Cadix, the history of Earl Guy 113. Trevelyan,
    the family seated in Somersetshire, and have lost half this estate,
    several manors mentioned by Lysons, besides Manely Coleshill,
    patronage of the benefice, present incumbent 114. Part of King
    Charles’s army here at the surrender of Fowey, statistics, Geology
    by Dr. Boase 115
  Velhuish, Mr. ii. 97
  Vellawrance, iii. 343
  Vellownoweth, iii. 319
  Venables, iii. 85
  Venetians attacked Patras, ii. 369. Sale of Thessalonica to 366. Sir
    Henry Killigrew, ambassador to 372
  Venice, iii. 187
  Vennefire, ii. 209
  Venning, Richard, iv. 18
  Venton, ii. 1――iv. 41
  Venus, planet, transit of, observed, iii. 19.――By Dr. Maskelyne, ii.
    222.――Observation interrupted by a storm, iv. 11
  Verbena chamoidryoides, iv. 183
  ―――― pulchella, iv. 183
  Vere, John de, i. 262. John, Earl of Oxford 402. John 12th Earl,
    John 14th Earl, Richard 11th Earl, and Sir Robert 262.――Aubrey,
    son of the 12th Earl of Oxford, attainted, and beheaded, ii. 182.
    George, brother of the 13th Earl 185. Earls of Oxford, Richard
    11th, John 12th 181 _bis_. Opposed the precedence of the spiritual
    lords 181. Attainted and beheaded 182. John 13th, adhered to Henry
    6th at the battle of Barnet, fled to Mount’s bay ibid. Entered it
    by stratagem 183. Twice repulsed Edward’s forces 184. Capitulated,
    confined at Hamms, returned with Henry 7th, killed at Bosworth
    185. John 14th, and his arms, ib. Richard, and Aubrey, last Earl
    195.――Richard de 11th Earl, iii. 65, 274. Family of the Earls of
    Oxford 258
  ―――― river in Herts, iv. 79
  Vergilia capensis, iv. 183
  Verian, Veryan, or St. Verian parish, ii. 50――iii. 198, 282, 402,
    403, 404, 451――iv. 116
  Verman, i. 387――ii. 25. Family 357. Monuments to in Lamaran church
    357.――Miss, iv. 116
  Vernoil, ii. 179
  Vernon, Judge, iii. 144
  Veronica, St. i. 315
  Verstegan, i. 302――ii. 236, 320.――His rhyme, iv. 128.――Richard, i. 264
  Verulam, the ancient name of St. Alban’s, ii. 64
  Veryan limestone, iv. 123 _bis_
  VERYAN parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, iv. 115. Ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, name of Elerchy, history
    of the Trevanion family 116. And of Robins, with their arms, manors
    of Treviles and Govile 117. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, name, history of St. Symphorian, a vicarage, value ibid.
    Patron, incumbent, impropriation, ancient name, manor of Elerchy,
    etymology 118. By Whitaker, name derived from the manorial house,
    its situation ibid. The mills, derivation of the name, dissertation
    on the use of imagination in antiquarian researches ibid. Saint,
    corruption of his name, parish feast 120. The church tower a later
    addition 121. By Editor, the manor, impropriators and patrons ibid.
    Three vicars related, the parish mentioned in an old charter,
    statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 122. And by the Editor 123. Mr.
    Trist’s account of the limestone, Pendower beach, analysis of the
    stone by Mr. Gregor, much superior to the Plymouth limestone ibid.
    Good for cement, contains iron, Mr. Greenough’s map 124
  Veryon, ii. 79
  Vespasian, Emperor, i. 198
  Vestia lycioides, iv. 283
  Vetorio Capelli, a Venetian general, ii. 369
  Veye, St. i. 328
  Vibart of Gulval, ii. 83. Isabel 83
  Vibert, Mr. a benefactor to the church at Penzance, iii. 93
  Victor 2nd Pope, i. 110 _bis_
  Victory man of war, wreck of, iv. 174
  Viel, heir of, iii. 279
  Vienna, Christendom preserved by John Sobieski, under the walls of,
    ii. 351
  Vignierius, i. 192
  Vigures, Hugh, ii. 423
  Ville Frank, taken by the English, iv. 177
  Villie, De, i. 296
  Villiers, Harriet, and John Earl Grandison, i. 69.――Barbara, Duchess
    of Cleveland, ii. 11. George Duke of Buckingham 382
  Vincent, i. 18, 292. Henry and S. V., 54.――John and Matthias, ii.
    227. Walter, killed Mr. George Killigrew, was tried and acquitted 5.
    Died suddenly 6. Walter 316. Mr. 227. Mrs. aunt of Mr. Tonkin 98.
    Arms, and story of them 227.――Family, made a fortune at Truro, iv.
    88. Represented it in parliament, lived at Tresimple, have
    disappeared 89
  ―――― of St. Allen, i. 205
  ―――― of Creed, ii. 90
  ―――― of Nantellon, John, i. 257
  ―――― of Stoke Dabernon, Surrey, family and arms, ii. 227
  ―――― of Trelevan family, iii. 192, 193.――Henry, ii. 55
  ―――― of Tresimple, Edward, Henry, Jane, Mary, Peter, Shadrack,
    Walter _bis_, and arms, i. 205.――Henry, ii. 317――iii. 188, 328. Mary
    188. Walter 328
  ―――― of Trigowethan, Walter, iii. 319
  ―――― of Truro, Edward, iii. 238. Nicholas 192. Walter 192, 327 _bis_
  Vinicombe, John, biography of, iii. 87
  Vinsam, Richard, i. 272, 275
  Virgil, notes on, iv. 87
  Virgin Mary, ii. 2, 96 _bis_――iv. 132. Truro church, dedicated to 75
  Virginia, Sir Richard Grenville undertakes to people, ii. 342
  ―――― fleet, the Dutch attempt to capture, its cargo landed at Foy,
    ii. 42
  Vivian, i. 74, 222. Sir Hussey 173. John 2, 215. Matthew 2. Sir
    Richard 222. Thomas, prior of Bodmin 75, 233. Bishop of Megara 75.
    Tomb 75, 95, 101. His official arms 75. Family arms 76, 94.――Edward,
    ii. 303. General Sir Hussey 34. His ancestors lived at Comprigney
    318. Jane 304. Ralph 398. Rev. Mr. 34.――Francis and Mary, iii. 135.
    Richard 387. Thomas, prior of St. Petroc’s, Bodmin, and Bishop of
    Megara in Greece 279――iv. 160.――Mr. iii. 147.――Sir Hussey originated
    from Truro, iv. 86. John 89. Family 139
  ―――― of Pencalerick, iii. 341.――Mr. iv. 89
  ―――― of Trelowarren, iv. 160
  ―――― of Trenowith, ii. 303
  ―――― of Trenowth in St. Colomb, ii. 335 _bis_. Thomas 335
  ―――― of Truan, i. 221, 383, 408. Anne 221, 222. Francis 216, 221,
    222. Jane 221, 222. John 216 _bis_, 221 _ter._, 222 _bis_. Mary 211,
    222 _bis_. Thomas 216, 221 _bis_, 222. Capt. Thomas 211. Arms
    222.――Family, ii. 43――iii. 148 _bis_――iv. 138 _bis_, 160 _bis_.
  Vivyan of Tollskiddy, ii. 255
  Volant, John de, ii. 209
  Voluba, i. 256
  Vorch, St. ii. 391 _bis_
  Vosper, i. 142――ii. 300.――Arthur, i. 142, 143.――John, iii.
    16.――Etymology, i. 143
  Vowell, i. 108
  Voysey, John, Bishop of Exeter, ii. 195
  Vyel of Trevorder, Miss, iii. 134
  Vyell, i. 117
  ―――― of Trevorder, i. 250. Julyan and William 378
  Vyvyan, i. 117, 209. Francis 248. Sir Vyell 101. Sir Francis and
    Jane, ii. 320. Sir Richard, M.P. for Cornwall 351.――Sir Francis, iv. 162
  Vyvyan of Cosowarth, in Little Colan, Mary, iii. 136
  ―――― of Merthin, Charles, i. 136. Sir Richard 136, 241
  ―――― of Trelowarren, i. 65, 148, 237. Jane 357. Sir Richard 211,
    357, 391.――Hannibal, Sir Francis, Sir Richard and Sir Vyell, all
    successively governors of St. Mawe’s castle, Sir Richard displaced
    from the government by Cromwell, ii. 277.――Ann, born in the Tower,
    iii. 136. Barbara 342. Carew 136. Sir Carew 337. Charles 135.
    Francis, built the house at Trelowarren 134. Sir Francis 314 _bis_,
    315 _bis_. Hannibal 134. Harriet 337. John 342. Michael 134. Philip
    137, 337 _ter._ Richard 134 _ter._ Richard 136 _bis_. Sir Richard
    135 _ter._ Sir Richard, a cavalier 135. Sent to the Tower, had time
    to destroy his papers, afterwards M.P. for Cornwall 136. Sir Richard
    seized by Mr. Boscawen 217. Sir Richard 337. Sir Richard R. his
    election for Bristol 137. Vyel 136, 137, 337. Sir Vyell 134, 135.
    Sir Vyell and his daughter 446. Five Misses 135. Mr. pupil of Dr.
    Borlase 53. Mr. 133, 337. Rev. Mr. 97. Family 44, 134 _bis_, 135
    _bis_, 216, 250, 258. Arms 135.――Sir R. R., Rev. Vyal of Withiel
    _bis_, and family, iv. 163

  Wadder family, iv. 17
  Waddon, i. 167.――Family, iii. 255. Monuments to ibid.
  ―――― of Tonacombe in Morwinstow, memorials of in Kilkhampton church,
    ii. 347
  Wade, general, i. 56
  Wadebridge, i. 115, 351, 375. Account of 372, 376. Erection 373.
    Fund for repair 374
  ―――― by Leland, iv. 259
  ―――― parish, ii. 256――iii. 324――iv. 46
  Wadebrygge, iv. 255
  Wadham college, Oxford, ii. 377, 389――iii. 20, 251
  ―――― Joseph, iii. 20. William 116. Family, founders of Wadham
    college, Oxford 20
  ―――― of Merrifield, John, ii. 110 _bis_
  Wadland, William, iii. 176
  Wager, Admiral Sir Charles, iv. 21, 36. Bond gives his history 37
  ―――― ship, loss of, iii. 205
  Wakefield, battle of, iii. 294
  Walburge, St. daughter of St. Richard, iv. 126. Little recorded of
    127. Church dedicated at Chester to 125. At Bristol 127
  Walcot, Dr. John, memoir of, iii. 219. His verses on Lieutenant
    Boscawen 220
  Waldegrave, Hon. Edward, monument to, ii. 325
  Wales, i. 307, 330, 334, 373――ii. 127――iii. 277, 336 _bis_, 340,
    460.――St. German travelled through, ii. 65 _bis_. Tin and copper ore
    carried into to be separated 303
  ―――― Prince of, ii. 376, 408――iv. 12, 19, 62, 72.――David, i.
    339.――Frederick, i. 69――ii. 84.――Joan, Princess, iii. 27.――-His
    plume, iv. 71, 78
  ―――― North, i. 294
  ―――― North Nesta, Princess of, and Rosse, Prince of, i. 34
  Walesborough, Walesbreu, Walesbury, or Whalesborough, John, iii.
    116. Mark de 307. Thomas, Thomas 116. Family 115. Arms 116.――Family,
    iv. 39
  Walesbury, or Walesborough, or Whalesborough manor, iii. 307.
    Account of 115, 117
  Walfi, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walker, Rev. S. M., i. 392.――Rev. James, ii. 85. Rev. Robert, vicar
    of St. Winnow 34――iv. 158 _bis_.――Rev. Robert, anecdote of, iii. 4
  ―――― of Exeter, i. 369――ii. 170
  ―――― of Lanlivery, Mr. ii. 34
  Waller, Sir William, the parliamentary general, ii. 343
  Wallingford castle, iii. 285――iv. 9, 17
  ―――― honour, iii. 44, 286――iv. 9, 17, 97, 127
  ―――― manor, ii. 89, 113
  Wallington, iii. 26
  Wallis, Rev. John, i. 96. Captain, R.N., 359――ii. 99. The discoverer
    of Otaheite 270. The circumnavigator 405. Betty, his only dau.,
    270.――Christopher, notice of, iii. 446. John, Captain Samuel, R.N.
    family, and their monuments 440
  Walocus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Walpole, i. 151. Sir Robert 265, 284. George Earl of Orford, his
    deed of entail, Robert Earl of Orford 313. Sir Robert 84,
    313.――George, Earl of Orford, iii. 230. Horace 117.――Family 254, and
    iv. 62
  Walsh, James, iv. 67
  Walsingham, St. Mary of, ii. 75
  Walter, Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, ii. 180 _bis_.――Mary, iii.
    337. Family 254
  Walton court, iii. 155
  Walveden of Walveden, Catherine and John, and Miss, iii. 357. Family
    357, 365
  ―――― manor, iii. 356
  Warbeck, Perkin, ii. 186 _bis_, 187 _bis_, 189, 190 _quint._――iii.
    433.――Saluted King of England, ii. 188. Takes sanctuary at Beauly,
    submits 190. Pardoned, afterwards escaped 191
  Warborough, iv. 125. The Editor thinks it resembles the Roman works
    in Dorsetshire 126
  Warbstow parish, iii. 275――iv. 59, 61 _quat._
  WARBSTOW parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name, iv.
    124. Consolidated with Trenegles, patron, incumbent 125. By Tonkin
    and Whitaker, situation, boundaries, name, saint, Chester Cathedral
    dedicated to her, attached to Treneglos, incumbent, Warborough
    fortification, from which, says Whitaker, the name is derived ibid.
    By Editor, this part abounds in military antiquities ibid.
    Surprising how armies could have been provisioned, has seen this
    entrenchment, much larger than those in Cornwall generally, the
    saint’s history, and of her relation St. Boniface 126. He invented
    the letter W, a church dedicated to St. Walburga at Bristol,
    impropriator, patron, Fentrigan manor, Donneny manor, statistics,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 127
  Warburg, St. iv. 125
  Warburton, William, Bishop of Gloucester, ii. 265, 266.――Dr.
    William, iii. 67, 68 _quint._, 69
  Ward, Simon, brewer to King Arthur, i. 131.――Dr. Seth, Bishop of
    Exeter, consecrated Falmouth church, ii. 4
  Wardour castle, Wilts, iv. 106
  Ware’s History of Ireland, iv. 145. MSS. 147
  Warinus, ii. 427
  Warlegan parish, ii. 239. Warleggon 167, 168. Warliggan 89――iv. 48,
    49.――Warligon, iii. 260
  WARLEGGON parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, ancient name,
    value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, Trengove, and
    family, iv. 128. Their arms 129. By Tonkin and Whitaker, situation,
    boundaries, etymology, value, patron, incumbent, manor ibid. By
    Editor, descent of the manor and patronage of the living, manor of
    Carborro, the church and tower injured by lightning, general
    carelessness in neglecting the simple security against lightning
    130. Statistics, rector, Geology by Dr. Boase 131
  Warlewast, Robert, iii. 456.――William, Bishop of Exeter, i. 27,
    95――ii. 87――iii. 456, 457, 458.――Founder of Launceston priory, ii.
    419, 428. His deed of gift to it 426. Buried at Plympton priory,
    suppressed St. Stephen’s collegiate church 419
  Warliggon manor, iv. 128. Account of 129
  Warne, Rev. Mr. i. 246, 250.――Lawsuit between two brothers, ii. 253.
    Lost the whole estate 254
  Warr, Joan, iii. 60
  Warren, Maria Lukey, i. 403. Thomas 10.――David, iii. 387. William 239
  ―――― a Roman fort, description of, iii. 365
  Warrick, Charles, his character, and anticipation of the machinery
    of steam-boats, iv. 91
  Warrington, i. 107
  Wars, French, of Edward 3rd, i. 85
  Warton, Thomas, ii. 266.――Mr. iv. 141
  ――――’s History of English Poetry, iv. 113
  Warwick castle, iv. 114
  Warwick, Earl of, i. 168――iii. 73.――Guy, iv. 111, 113.――Thomas, i.
    341.――Beauchamp, ii. 130. Richard Neville 38. Richard 182 _ter._
  Wash in Lincolnshire, iii. 10
  Wastrell downs, i. 239
  Water, high, time of, at various points, iii. 375
  Waterloo, battle, Sir Hussey Vivian shared the glories of, iv. 86
  ―――― bridge, built of Cornwall stone, iii. 63
  Watson, Bishop, iv. 45
  Waunford, Thomas de, iv. 13; or Waurnford family and coheir 16
  Wayne, William, iii. 426
  Wayte, William, i. 243. Arms 244
  ―――― of Lestwithiel, i. 243
  ―――― of Trewenethick, William, iii. 324 _bis_
  Webb, John, ii. 196
  Webber, Jonathan and arms, ii. 336.――Edy, iii. 387. Joseph 362.
    Thomas 181, 387
  Wedgewood, Josiah, and Mrs. iii. 34.――Mr. procured soap rock from
    Lammoran parish, ii. 360
  Wednock, St. iv. 53
  Week St. Mary, near Stratton, a tower at, iii. 363
  WEEK ST. MARY, parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value,
    patron, land tax, iv. 131. Thomasine Bonaventure, her history,
    obscure birth, she falls in with a London merchant 132. Goes with
    him to London as his servant, afterwards marries him, and is early
    left a rich widow, her second marriage and widowhood 133. Marries
    thirdly, is Lady Mayoress, in her third widowhood lived piously and
    charitably, founded a chantry and school in this parish 134.
    Dissolved by Edward 6th, two fairs 135. By Editor, church
    conspicuous, tower nearly the most lofty in Cornwall, town large,
    etymology of Week, lines on _sweet saints_ ibid. Town called a
    borough, manor merged in that of Swannacot, manor of East Orchard
    Mauvais, Castle-hill, advowson, statistics, rector, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 136
  Weekly Miscellany, i. 283
  Weights, stone, found in Castle Dinas, i. 228
  Well, medicinal, i. 160
  Wellington, Duke, iv. 86, 159
  Wells, insurgent advance to, i. 86. Proceed from 87.――See removed
    to, iv. 36
  Welscomb, Thomas, i. 290
  Welsh bards, iii. 431.――Jones’s Relics of, ii. 166
  ―――― people, i. 307
  ―――― princes, iii. 336
  ―――― stone coal, iv. 123
  ―――― tongue, i. 337
  ―――― victory over the Picts, ii. 65
  Wen, de, iii. 214
  ―――― St. parish, sheaf of, ii. 44
  Wena, St. Bishop of Winchester, iv. 137
  Wenap, St ii. 129, 132 _bis_
  WENAP parish. _See Gwenap_
  Wenca, i. 2
  Wendron church, iii. 447.――St. Wendron, ii. 136, 137――St. Wendrone,
    iv. 5
  WENDRON parish. _See Gwendron_
  ―――― parish, i. 261.――St. Wendron, ii. 160.――St. Wendrone, iii. 5
  ―――― St. vicarage, ii. 138
  Wendyn, Robert, i. 313
  Wenheder, i. 2
  Wenn, St. iv. 160
  ―――― church, i. 74――iii. 188
  ―――― parish, i. 115, 212.――iii. 391, 395――iv. 163
  WENN, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint, the only
    parish in Cornwall with the prefix of saint in Domesday Book, value
    of benefice, patron, incumbent, impropriation, land tax, iv. 137.
    Tower and bells struck down by lightning, Tregury family, Michael,
    Archbishop of Dublin, his Latin epitaph, mistranslated by Hals,
    Lancorla barton 138. The dwelling of Mr. Hals, the manor of Lancorla
    and of Checkenock, Trewithan 139. Damelsa castle and house,
    Treganatha, fairs at 140. By Tonkin, situation, boundaries, saint, a
    vicarage, value, patron, incumbent, manor of Borlase ibid. Family of
    Norman origin, disputed by Whitaker 141. By Editor, Great Skewish,
    Skewish family, one of them compiled the wars of Troy temp. Henry
    6th, Archbishop Tregury. Editor’s communication with Dean Dawson,
    the Archbishop’s tomb restored by Swift ibid. Engraving of the tomb
    142. Editor’s letter to the Gentleman’s Magazine with it, antiquity
    and vigour of that work, history of the Archbishop nearly lost,
    noticed by Lysons, successive possessors of the estate, tomb seen by
    a Cornish gentleman, application to the Dean 143. Records of the
    Dublin prelates, &c. lost, preservation of the tomb, Wood’s mention
    of the Archbishop as governor of the newly founded college of Caen
    144. Memoir of him from Ware’s History of Ireland 145. Said to have
    been taken prisoner at sea, doubted, certain persons excommunicated
    for laying violent hands on him, his death 146. Monument described,
    preserved, his will 147. Celebration of a jubilee at Rome, dreadful
    fatality from the crowds, Tregury ordered a fast of three days in
    his diocese, his works, documents respecting the restoration of his
    temporalities 148. Parish statistics, incumbent, Geology by Dr.
    Boase 151
  Wenna, i. 2.――A female saint, iv. 140
  Wennack, St. iii. 37
  Wennow, St. parish, i. 112.――St. Wenow, ii. 41――iv. 110
  Wensent, i. 2
  Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, iii. 152
  Werrington, i. 266.――Barton, iii. 283, 459 _quat._ Possessors of 460
  ―――― manor, iv. 64 _bis_
  ―――― parish, iii. 456, 459 _quat._, 460――iv. 152
  Werstanus, Bishop of Devon, iii. 415
  Wescombe, Robert, iii. 153
  Wesley, John, preached in Gwenap pit, ii. 133
  Wessy, St. ii. 412
  West, John, iii. 387. Colonel John 419
  ―――― of Redruth, Udy, ii. 239
  ―――― of England Architecture, iv. 16
  ―――― hundred, i. 112, 167, 174, 316――ii. 291, 394, 409――iii. 13, 118,
    245, 260, 291, 347――iv. 19, 23, 110, 111, 128, 129, 155, 184
  ―――― Indies, regular communication of Falmouth with, ii. 18. Mr.
    Knill’s mission to 266. Ship supposed to have made for when
    driven to the Cornish coast 268
  ―――― Looe, Mr. Daniell, M.P. for, ii. 318
  ―――― Saxon Kings, iii. 139
  ―――― Saxons, Kingill, King of, ii. 284.――St. Richard, King of, iv. 126
  ―――― North, account of, i. 319
  Westbury of Winston Westbury, Edward, i. 400
  Westcot, iii. 163
  ―――― down, iv. 18
  Western circuit, ii. 227. Lawyers of 53
  ―――― lighthouse, its latitude and longitude, ii. 359
  Westlake of Elmsworthy, ii. 347. The last of the family died in
    destitution, twice pricked for Sheriff while in the poorhouse 347.
    Memorials in Kilkhampton church ibid.
  Westmacott, the sculptor, iii. 229
  Westminster, i. 345――ii. 403――iii. 242
  ―――― abbey, i. 170――iii. 65, 167.――Monuments in, iv. 38
  ―――― abbot of, ii. 149
  ―――― hall, ii. 190, 191, 192――iii. 131. The Bishops tried in 296
  ―――― school, iii. 296, 300
  ―――― statute, ii. 4
  Weston, William, English prior of the Knights of Malta, i.
    411.――Stephen, Bishop of Exeter, iii. 40. Judge 144.――Mr. and
    Bishop, iv. 118
  Wetherall, Sir Charles, ii. 162
  Weymouth, sea fight near, ii. 26
  Whaddon, i. 104
  Whalesborough family, iv. 114. _See Walesborough_
  Wharton’s History of English Poetry, i. 342
  ――――’s London, i. 251
  Wheal tower mine, ii. 33
  Wheare, Degory, his history and works, ii. 233
  Whele, Alfred, i. 143――iii. 345
  ―――― Etherson, i. 414
  ―――― Fortune, ii. 83, 219――Copper, iii. 47
  ―――― Reath, tin, account of, iii. 113
  ―――― Treliston, ii. 143
  ―――― Vor, i. 127, 128――iii. 13, 447
  Wherry mine, account of, iii. 99
  Whetstone, iv. 54
  Whetton, Samuel, i. 112
  Whichcott, Colonel Christopher, commissioner for the parliament
    army, iv. 189
  Whigs were joined by George I. and George II. the battle of Culloden
    caused their fall, ii. 244
  Whitaker, Rev. John, i. 96.――Some particulars of his Life, rector of
    Ruan Lanyhorne, iii. 406. His literary character 407.――His history
    of Cornwall, ii. 123, 127, 143, 153, 199, 231, 240, 254 _bis_, 255,
    273, 274――iii. 278, 292, 302, 321, 348, 363, 364 _ter._, 365, 366,
    398 _bis_, 399. His style, &c., 342.――His remarks upon Truro castle
    and town, iv. 78. General remarks at the end of the work 167.――Mr.
    i. 73
  Whitaker’s cathedrals of Cornwall, i. 299
  Whitchurch, Ranulph de, iv. 16
  White, i. 266.――John and Robert, ii. 300. Rev. Mr. 151.――Thomas,
    Bishop of Peterborough, one of the seven, iii. 299
  White’s “Natural History of Selborne,” iii. 206
  White Friars, house at Truro, iv. 76, 79
  ―――― works mine, ii. 302
  Whitechapel, iii. 188
  Whitechurch parish, near Tavistock, iii. 390
  Whiteford barton, iv. 9, 11. Purchased by Mr. Call 10
  ―――― Rev. Mr. of Lestwithiel, iii. 24
  Whitehall, iii. 143
  Whiteleigh of Efford, John, i. 313, and Richard 313 _bis_.――Richard,
    ii. 43, 109, 189. Whitleigh of Efford 419. Joanna, Margaret, and
    Richard, ib.
  Whitford, Rev. Mr. of Poundstock, iii. 352
  Whiting, Rev. William, of St. Martin’s in Meneage, iii. 126
  Whitminster family and heir, iv. 16
  Whitmore, Mr. iii. 90
  Whitsand, or Whitsend bay, iii. 310, 433, 435.――Excavation at, ii. 252
  Whitstone parish, i. 133――iii. 86――iv. 39, 40
  WHITSTONE parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, value of benefice,
    patron, incumbent, land tax, barton of Bennet, iv. 152. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, etymology, ib. A rectory, value, patron,
    incumbent, manor, name of the parish derived from it, Whitaker
    153. By Editor, church and tower fine and well seated, monuments,
    patron, and incumbent, statistics, Geology by Dr. Boase 154
  Whitsuntide, iii. 427.――Celebrated at Wilton by Canute, iv. 96
  Whittington, i. 121, 262.――Blanche, John and Thomas, iii. 317.
    William 316, 317 _bis_
  Wickliffe, iii. 163.――John, i. 314
  Widemouth, west, manor, iii. 353
  Widislade, ii. 427
  Wiedbury, ii. 292
  Wight, Isle of, a battle off, ii. 342
  Wike St. Mary, parish, i. 296――iv. 40, 59, 152 _bis_
  Wilgress, Rev. J. T. ii. 144
  Wilkes, John, i. 173.――Mr. ii. 245
  Wilkin, John, ii. 189
  Wilkins, Rev. Mr. ii. 372
  Wilkinson, William, ii. 189
  William, Rev. Anthony, rector of St. Keverne, rendered insensible by
    a storm during divine service, ii. 324. Sends an account of it to
    the Royal Society, ib.
  ―――― son of the Earl of Morton, ii. 211
  ―――― the Conqueror, i. 43, 241, 367――ii. 89, 118, 130, 147, 175, 176
    _bis_, 210, 211 _ter._, 235, 237, 238, 259, 310, 344, 379, 384, 399,
    418――iii. 22, 44, 46, 114, 129, 134, 142, 276, 291, 346, 349, 352,
    422, 451 _bis_, 456. Charter of 114, 117――iv. 14, 15, 62, 67, 102,
    118, 153
  ―――― 1st, King, ii. 50, 51, 59, 62, 80, 92, 94, 106, 129, 145, 155,
    175, 253, 257, 259, 273, 299, 315, 332, 335――iii. 64, 74, 79, 101,
    114, 115, 118, 139, 391――iv. 184
  ―――― Rufus, ii. 147, 211 _bis_, 344――iii. 462――iv. 140
  ―――― 3rd, i. 46――ii. 51, 54, 76, 89, 112, 127, 255, 277, 278,
    301――iii. 15, 78, 148, 168, 176, 182, 186, 195, 199, 208, 222, 237,
    297 _bis_, 417, 421――iv. 22, 107, 116 _ter._, 152, 160
  ―――― and Mary, ii. 236
  ―――― 4th, King, iv. 18
  ―――― Duke of Normandy, iii. 462
  ―――― of Malmesbury, i. 200――iv. 96
  Williams, i. 16, 158, 210, 387. Edward 272, 276. Rev. Humphrey 355.
    Jane 357. John 154, 277.――John, ii. 134. Richard 256. Mr. 157.
    Family 336.――Rev. Anthony of St. Kevern, iii. 88. Courtenay 367.
    John 350. Thos. of Lombard Street, London 162. Three Misses 343. Mr.
    82, 363. Family 343, 363.――John, iv. 55. Mr. 74. Henry 77
  ―――― of Bodenick, or Boderick, William, i. 319.――William, ii. 410, 411
  ―――― of Carmanton, John, i. 225.――(or Willyams) of Carnanton, Anne,
    iii. 229. Humphrey 151. John 229
  ―――― of Carvean, Catherine, John, iii. 355. Mary 355, 362. Arms 355
  ―――― of Dorset or Wilts, arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of Helston, John, i. 357
  ―――― of Herringston in Dorset, Mr. family, and arms, iii. 356
  ―――― of Probus, i. 396――ii. 54
  ―――― of Rosworthy, John, and arms, iii. 145
  ―――― of St. Blazey, Hugh, his marriages, and death, i. 53. Building
    a new house 54. Arms 53
  ―――― of Tregenna, John, i. 420
  ―――― of Trehane, i. 400.――Mary and Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― of Trevorva, arms, iii. 355
  ―――― of Trewithan, Richard, i. 53, 225.――Courtenay, iii. 356
  ―――― of Trewithgy, William, iii. 355
  ―――― of Truthan, i. 398 _bis_. John 396, 398. Arms 396
  Willington family, iii. 348
  Willis, Andrew, killed at Skewis, i. 276 _bis_
  ―――― Browne, ii. 200――iii. 120, 268, 459.――His additions to Camden,
    i. 257, 339. Notitia Parliamentaria 200――ii. 68, 403――iii. 14, 16,
    17, 24, 25, 26, 27――iv. 117.――Account of St. German’s priory, ii.
    69, 71, 72. Of Launceston 422, 423
  ―――― of Fen Ditton, Bart. Sir Thomas and Sir William, ii. 97
  ―――― of London, Dorothy and Thomas, ii. 97
  Willoughby, sheriff of Cornwall, ii. 186. Family 313
  ―――― de Broke, Lord, ii. 231.――Family, iii. 47
  Wills, Rev. Mr. i. 383.――Anthony offers himself and six sons to King
    William 3rd, ii. 112. Rev. Thomas 139 _bis_. Rev. Thomas, vicar of
    Wendron 326.――Rev. Mr. of Mullion, iii. 257
  Wills of Helston, Matthew, ii. 139, 326
  ―――― of Wivelscomb, iii. 269
  Willyams of Cannerton, Anne, John, John and Oliver, ii. 85
  Wilow, St. ii. 411.――By Leland, iv. 279
  Wilson’s Martyrology, iii. 385
  Wilton, Canute celebrated Whitsuntide at, iv. 96
  ―――― abbey, Wilts, iii. 291.――St. Udith, abbess of, iv. 93. Built
    St. Denis church at, and was buried there 94.――Priors of, ii. 291
  ―――― convent at, iv. 96
  ―――― of Dunveth, Miss, John, iv. 3
  Wiltshire, i. 334
  ―――― William Lord Scrope, Earl of, Lord treasurer, iii. 129
  Wimbourn Minster, iv. 126
  Winchelsea, its naval armaments defeated Fowey, ii. 45
  Winchester, i. 326, 327, 336――ii. 139.――Rebels march through, i. 87
  ―――― Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of, ii. 194.――Jonathan Trelawney, iii.
    295, 297
  ―――― Levignus, monk of, ii. 60
  ―――― measure, iii. 182
  Windham, Madam, iii. 449. Mr. 449 _ter._
  Windsor, i. 146 _bis_
  ―――― collegiate church, i. 341
  ―――― dean and chapter of, ii. 72
  ―――― poor knights of, ii. 52, 54, 55
  ―――― Gerald de, i. 34. Otho de 34 _bis_. Walter de 34. William de
    34, 35
  ―――― Lord, i. 34
  Winenton in Kerrier, iii. 133
  Winfred, St. iv. 126
  Wingfield, Miss, i. 266――ii. 243.――Family, iv. 156
  Winnocus, St. and his history, iv. 157
  Winnous, St. by Leland, iv. 278
  Winnow manor, ii. 252
  ―――― St. downs, iv. 29, 186 _bis_, 188
  ―――― St. parish, i. 113, 421, 358, 376, 379, 390――iii. 24――iv. 111,
    184.――Rev. Robert Walker, vicar of, ii. 34
  WINNOW, ST. parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, saint’s name,
    ancient name, value of benefice, incumbent, land tax, St. Nectan’s
    chapel. History of the saint, his chapel at Hartland, built by
    Goditha, daughter of Earl Godwin, the Earl attributing his
    preservation in a tempest at sea to the saint’s intercession, iv.
    155. Barton and manor of St. Winow, its possessors 156. Tethe,
    Trevego, Laran bridge 157. By Tonkin, saint, his history, Bergh St.
    Winnox, benefice, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent,
    impropriation ibid. By Editor, beautiful situation of the church,
    vicarage house and glebe, Mr. Walker, chapel, Ethy, notice of
    Admiral Penrose 158. Statistics, the vicars, value of the benefice,
    Geology by Dr. Boase 159
  Winnow, St. vicarage, beauty of, iv. 158
  Winock, St. abbey, at Bergh in Flanders, iii. 33
  Winotus, St. iv. 155
  Winow, St. barton and manor, iv. 156
  Winslade, i. 7
  ―――― of Tregarrick, or St. Agnes, William, ii. 192
  Winsloe, Mr. ii. 399
  Winslow, Rev. R. of Minster, iii. 236 _bis_. Thomas, took the name
    of Phillips 235
  Winstanley of Littlebury, Essex, built the first lighthouse at
    Eddystone, iii. 376 _ter._
  Winter of Sydney, Sir John, i. 398
  ―――― of Kellyfreth, ii. 304. Arms, ib.
  ―――― an eminent family of Gloucestershire, ii. 304
  Winwaloe, St. iv. 60
  Winwallo, St. ii. 127. His history 127, 128 _ter._
  Winwolaus of Tremene chapel, iv. 60
  Wise, i. 370
  ―――― of Stoke Damarel, i. 266
  Witchalse, Benet and his daughter, iii. 199
  Withal rectory house, i. 75
  Withel parish, iii. 391, 395.――Withell, ii. 94, 335.――Withiel, i.
    115――ii. 384――iv. 137, 140
  Withell goose manor, iv. 160 _bis_
  Withering, Dr. ii. 331.――The botanist, iii. 173
  Witherington, Dr. i. 150
  Withiel church, i. 74
  ―――― parish, _see Withel_
  WITHIEL parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, incumbent, land tax, iv. 160.
    Rectory house built, Burnevas, Trenance, family, and arms, Bryn 161.
    Birth of Sir Bevill Grenville 162. By Tonkin, situation, value of
    benefice, appropriation, a rectory, value, incumbent ibid. By
    Editor, rectory house improved, Trewren monument, statistics,
    incumbent, Geology by Dr. Boase 163
  Withroe manor, ii. 252
  Withyel, Richard Trewren, rector of, i. 376
  Wivelsberge, advowson of, iii. 115
  Wodehouse, ii. 117. Lord, is the representative of the Killigrew
    family 23
  Wolf, the, iv. 173
  Wolfchild, Lady, mother of St. Udith, iv. 93
  Wolfe, General, iii. 218
  Wolfran, St. and his festival, iv. 117
  Wollacombe of Devon, Mr. iii. 222 _bis_
  Wollas, iii. 258
  Wolphard, abbot, iv. 126
  Wolpher, King of Mercia, iv. 125
  Wolridge, Thomas, iii. 374
  ―――― of Gorminick, John, i. 420
  Wolrige, Dr. Hugh, monument to, and John, iii. 454
  Wolsey, Cardinal, ii. 361――iii. 299 _bis_
  Wolsey’s survey, iii. 340
  Wolvedon, or Goulden, barton, in St. Probus and Tregony, iii. 359.
    Fort on 365
  ―――― of Golden, Charles or Christopher, i. 297
  Wolverston, i. 136
  ―――― of Wolverston, ii. 5
  Wood, i. 76, 210――ii. 215.――Anthony, iii. 251――iv. 144. His Annals
    144.――His Athenæ Oxonienses, ii. 233――iii. 296――iv. 86. His Fasti
    144.――William, ii. 353.――Rev. William, junior, iii. 450.――Rev.
    William of Withiel, iv. 162. Rev. Mr. of Treneglos 61. Rev. Mr. of
    Warbstow 125. Rev. Mr. of Withiel 160
  ―――― Knowle, iii. 117
  Woodberry, i. 168
  Woodland, Sir William, iii. 239
  ―――― street, i. 79
  Woodley, Rev. C. W. of Stithians, iv. 5
  Woodly village, ii. 385
  Woodvill, Lionel, Bishop of Salisbury, ii. 194. Richard Earl Rivers 194
  Woolcock, ii. 192.――J. H. iii. 387
  Woolcombe, Rev. Charles of Minster, iii. 236. Rev. William of
    Pillaton 347
  Woolcumbe, Mr. ii. 279
  ―――― of Longford hill, ii. 279
  Woolford village, iii. 255
  Woolley, J. T. i. 314, 315.――James, iii. 346. Mr. 163
  ―――― village, iii. 255
  Woolridge, Rector of St. Michael Penkivell, i. 256.――Rev. Mr. of
    Tywardreth, iv. 99
  ―――― of Carlynike, John, and arms, i. 256
  Woolrington, John de, i. 246
  Woolston, George, shot in Rogers’s affray, i. 274 _quat._, 275
    _ter._――Mr. iii. 366
  ―――― manor, iii. 353
  Worcester, St. Chad, patron of, ii. 391
  ―――― Florence of, iii. 310――iv. 168
  ―――― William of, ii. 203, 204, 206――iii. 223, 292, 350.――His
    Itinerary, Appendix 6, iv. 222 to 256. Containing his life 222.
    List of Cornish castles 228. Itinerary from Polston Brygge to
    Porthenys 229. List of the Scilly islands and of obits 230.
    Memoranda 231. List of rivers 233. Memoranda from Thomas Peperelle
    234. Extracts from the Bodman kalendar 236. Sources of the rivers,
    and a list of islands 237. Account of Bodman, and an extract from
    the Martyrology 238. From Bodman kalendar 239. From Bodman
    register respecting the plague, and memoranda from Robert Bracey
    240. Verses at Tavistock and extract from the Tavistock kalendar
    241. Property of Penryn college 242. Itinerary from North sea to
    the Thamar river 243. List of the havens 244. Itinerary from
    Penzance to Plymton 245. Memoranda from the kalendar of Mont
    Myghele, journey from Weare to Manchew 249. Various memoranda 250
    to 252. Dates of the above journey 252 to 255. Bridges in Cornwall
    from Exeter to St. Michael’s mount 255
  Worcester, William Worth, Archdeacon of, iii. 62
  ―――― William Lloyd, Bishop of, iii. 299
  ―――― college, Oxford, ii. 233
  Worcestershire, ii. 147――iii. 344
  Woronus, Bishop of Cornwall, iii. 415
  Worsley, Rev. Charles, rector of Leskeard, iii. 23
  Worth, i. 240.――Mr. ii. 97.――John, iii. 60, 62 _bis_. Built a house
    at Tremogh 62. Family and marriage of the heiress ibid.
  ―――― of Penryn, John son of John, William, and William, D.D. iii. 62
  ―――― of Worth, family and arms, iii. 60
  Wortha, Higher, iii. 258
  ―――― Lower, iii. 258
  Worthyvale manor, iii. 234 _bis_, 236. King Arthur received his
    death wound at 236
  Wotton, account of, ii. 362. The barton of Trelugan manor 363
  ―――― cross village, ii. 362
  Wray, William, iii. 358
  Wrey, Elizabeth and Sir William, i. 210.――Rev. H. B. ii. 416.――Sir
    William, iii. 16.――Sir Bourchier, iv. 112. Rev. W. B. 50. Family 110
    _bis_. Of Devon 50
  ―――― of Trebigh, Sir Bourchier, Sir Chichester John _bis_, William
    _bis_, and arms, i. 411
  Wright, ii. 130, 253, 375
  Wring Cheese, i. 178, 179. Described 184, 190
  Wringworthy, Higher, iii. 246
  ―――― manor, iii. 252
  Wroughton, Miss, ii. 218
  Wulrington, ii. 430
  Wulvedon, by Leland, iv. 272
  Wykeham, William of, iii. 171
  Wyllacombe, iv. 29
  Wylliams of Roseworthy in Gwyniar, Ann, iii. 159. Rev. Cooper 159,
    160. Rector of Kingston near Canterbury, his works 160. Humphrey
    James and James 159. John 159 _bis_, 160. John and John 159. John O.
    159 _bis_. An anecdote he told 160. Thomas Captain 159
  Wymer, St. ii. 142
  Wymond, Mr. i. 78.――Family and coheirs, iv. 113
  Wymondesham, W. de, iv. 44
  Wymondeston, W. de, iv. 46
  Wymondham, William de, i. 383
  Wymp, i. 2
  Wynn, Right Hon. Charles Williams, M.P. ii. 20
  Wynnanton, ii. 126, 128
  Wynne, i. 163, 400, 401. Rev. Dr. Luttrell 164, 401 _ter._, 402
    _ter._, 403.――Rev. Dr. ii. 114
  Wynnenton, i. 241
  Wynnock, St. parish, ii. 358
  Wyse, William, iv. 147

  Xantus, Prince of Caretica, i. 300
  Xenophon, translations from, ii. 76
  Xysten, St. i. 88

  Yealm bridge, iii. 283
  Yeard, Richard, i. 210
  Yellow Leigh manor, ii. 416
  Yeo family, ii. 86, 416.――Arms 87
  ―――― of Trevelver family, iii. 240
  Yescombe, E. B. monument to, iii. 229
  York, i. 397――ii. 213
  ―――― Archbishop of, i. 139――ii. 90.――St. Paulinus the first, iii.
    284, 285
  ―――― county, i. 258――ii. 76――iv. 42.――Chalk hills in, iii. 10
  ―――― diocese, iv. 42
  ―――― Duke of, ii. 94. James 27. His engagement with the Dutch fleet,
    and letter of thanks to Captain Penrose 28.――Richard, i. 168, 169
    _ter._――ii. 260
  ―――― William, ii. 189
  ―――― house of, i. 169――ii. 108, 185, 186 _bis_, 187
  ―――― street, near Covent Garden, iii. 252
  ―――― and Lancaster wars, iii. 199
  Yorke of Somersetshire, Humphrey settled at Trevassack, Richard of
    Wellington, Sarah, and family, iii. 342
  Young, Rev. Denis, iii. 256
  Yse, i. 2

  Zamkees the Samothracian, i. 24
  Zealand, iii. 227
  Zela, i. 20
  ZENNAR parish, by Hals, situation, boundaries, etymology, ancient
    name, value of benefice, patron, land tax, founder and
    impropriator, soil, tin, Chapel Jane, iv. 164. By Tonkin,
    situation, boundaries, name, a vicarage, value, patron, incumbent
    ibid. By Editor, beauty of the scenery, fertile, church and tower,
    bells inscribed, no saint to be found, feast, St. John Lateran
    church at Rome, Trereen Dinas, or the Gurnet’s head 165. Editor
    purchased it for its geological interest, impropriation,
    statistics, vicar, patron, Geology by Dr. Boase 166
  Zennor parish, i. 132――iii. 242――iv. 52, 53, 54
  Zouch, Lord, i. 170――John Lord, iii. 102




ERRATA.


VOLUME IV.

  P. 36, line 10, _for_ Polbenro, _read_ Polperro.
  P. 41, line 10, _read_ Horningcote.
  P. 44, line 2 from bottom, _for_ Mr. _read_ Mrs.
  P. 45, line 2, _for_ Dinnavale, _read_ Dellabole;
         line 6, _for_ Treveares, _read_ Treveans;
         line 14, _for_ brother, _read_ brothers.
  P. 46, line 19, _for_ an entire, _read_ a complete.
  P. 54, line 7 from foot, _after_ ecclesiastical, _read_ and Duchy.
  P. 67, line 19, _read_ from whom it has descended.
  P. 74, line 11, _for_ Ballivor, _read_ Ballivo.
  P. 93, line 20, _for_ he, _read_ she.
  P. 114, line 6 from foot, _for_ Trevilyan, _read_ Tresilyan.
  P. 138, line 17, _for_ bold, _read_ bald.
  P. 139, line 14, _dele_ (S. T.)
  P. 161, _add to the note_, and the name should be Trewren.




THE END.




J. B. NICHOLS AND SON, 25, PARLIAMENT-STREET.




Transcriber’s Note:


This book was written in a period when many words and names had not
become standardized in their spelling. Words may have multiple
spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation in the text. These
have been left unchanged. Dialect, obsolete and alternative spellings
were left unchanged, as were misspelled words, incorrect use of
homonyms, and sentences without verbs. Words and phrases in italics
are surrounded by underscores, _like this_. Superscripted characters
are preceded by a carat, e.g. Gen^l. The book used hyphens, dots, and
spaces of various lengths to indicate unknown names, dates or words.
For consistency, these were changed to four dashes: ――――. Insular
letters were replaced with contemporary equivalents. In Appendix XI,
abbreviations are sometimes indicated with a macron or tilde above or
through one or more letters. These are shown within brackets, e.g.
[=m] and [~co].

Obvious printing errors, such as backwards, upside down, missing or
partially printed letters, were corrected. Unprinted punctuation and
final stops missing at the end of abbreviations and sentences were
added. Duplicated words were removed, as were duplicate letters after
rejoining words that were hyphenated at the end of a line. Excess spaces
in abbreviations of titles, D.D. and M.D., were removed.

Footnotes were numbered sequentially and moved to the end of the
section in which the anchors occur. Footnotes [139] and [335] are
missing in the original; there are no anchors for footnotes [227],
[230], and [337]. In Appendix XII, many footnotes have multiple
anchors.

Noted, not changed:

  -- The inscription in Greek on page 37 may be missing a word at the
     end of the first line (Βαθύλλου); gamma was substituted for
     upside-down lambda in line 5.
  -- On page 193 in Appendix V, there is no subparagraph 3.
  -- Page numbers missing in Appendix X are also missing in the original
     of Tanner’s Notitia monastica.
  -- “1422” should read “1242” “…in anno 1422, (26 Hen. III.)…”

The list of errata at the end of the book appears only in Volume 1; it
was added for the convenience of readers.


Adjustments to the Index:

Changes:

  Angelo, St., ... descended fram to descended from.
  page number for DULO parish, from i. 216 to i. 316.
  initial I to S. ... Enys, John, ii. 93, 243. J. S.
  moved entry for Exceter Brygge from “F” to alpha location in “E”.
  change spring 713 to spring 173, within entry for St. Hillary.
  Where a name was repeated in the index at the top of the next
    column, name was changed to ――― for consistency with other entries.
  Removed ――― indent before entry: Phillipps, Rev. William and family...
  backwards and upside down 3 to a 2 for entry:
    Wallingford castle, iii. 285.

Added:

  page number (31) to geology for St. Anthony in Powder.
  volume and page number for Fairs, custom of displaying a glove.
  periods missing after volume numbers and abbreviations.
  page number 349 to Nugent...―Lord 349.
  corrected 3 lines in a row, right column, Phillack parish,
    unprinted: period after Mr. on first line, e of house on second line
    and hyphen in word divided at end of third line.
  added comma to Bishop of, St. Hilary... under Poictiers.
  missing ‘o’ in ‘governor of Plymouth’ under entry for Trelawny.

Comment:

  Page numbers for index items are occasionally missing in the original.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Parochial History of Cornwall,
Volume 4 (of 4), by Davies Gilbert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PAROCHIAL HISTORY OF CORNWALL, VOL 4 ***

***** This file should be named 60558-0.txt or 60558-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/6/0/5/5/60558/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Carol Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

